Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2067241451

## Looking How Facebook Became From A Marketing Perspective

Over the years, there are a lot of glasses with different lenses that we have worn over the years in how we explore and research information: so long are the glasses people used to rely (close connections, yellow pages). For the better, we decided to embrace our world through a new set of glasses (search engines, social networks) to expand our horizons. Join ex-global business marketing of Facebook Mike Hoefflinger as he unfolds the story of how Facebook took the lead to become the main portal for information discovery, as well monetizing its portal with personalized advertisements to users effectively. The book concepts of how Facebook works and how it has grown to today's standards are very clear, especially with the few visual aids, such as charts and diagrams provided in the book. Besides Entrepreneurship lessons, this is a Business History book, and what history book is without no names that become the catalysts for influencing the events of history?Facebook achievements and deliverables are too much to fit in a book, so the author discusses the main highlights of the organization by narrowing to the few lead executives that provided the biggest impact on influencing the path Facebook stands today. Each candidate that did a huge impact on Facebook is enough personalized in this book that they become memorable figures. 

There are a lot of entrepreneurship insights that will be even more easier for readers to grasp if they remembered the rollouts and acquisitions the social network giant did and have some background in business, marketing, and HR concepts. Even if you don't know much about Facebook or how a business operates, this book goes through the ropes to explaining each topic from a beginner's mindset perspective. Nevertheless, this book is a good remedy for all the press giving different twists of how tech companies operate. This gives a more clear big picture, a better compass, for what Facebook intentions were and where they are heading. It gives you an additional layer of understanding the mindset of the chess pieces the social network giant places over the board.

That comes to one of the greatest assets Facebook has which to this day we take it for granted: their personalized news feed founded by Cox. To be quite honest, I do not see the personalized news feed alone at its full potential. Quite honestly saying, firstly, any individual news we extract is an individual piece that needs to be integrated into the big picture of things. That requires extra time for me to do on my end. In contrast, when I am reading a well-thought book, I am not only creating a relationship and better background of understanding the current mindset of the author, but I am getting a package of information that is more bundled and integrated that I can align it easier on my own mental framework. Regardless, it is hard to deny that Facebook started as a Family Photobook and scaled up to a place where we can share our stories. Secondly, all is left is whether the stories we read are relevant to our goals and whether we can adjust accordingly to what type of people and content we want to be influenced. That requires self-reflection. For example, even when reading this book, I am writing a well thought out review to adjust my views accordingly to the rest of the books I have read. Although we have Google to ask "find me more details about something specific" and Facebook to explore "I want to get more about some broad category, company, person", we don't have a guide "I want to go from A to B. What are the intermediate steps so I can reach B". With the advances in technology, although we can eradicate all the intermediate steps to do a specific thing, shortcuts like that will not exist for improving our own personal self.

What will you learn in this book? You will learn: 

### 1. Facebook great product is all about its culture:
* A. Most of its services Facebook runs are software based that promote a safe environment for experimentation. We know experimentation cultivates a culture that innovates. Thus, Facebook created a culture that embraces a learn by doing approach and embrace failures through a growth mindset.
* B. Employee talent and retention were best done by keeping the employees engaged with something in the company that was attributed to their strengths and were very interested with (that type of engagement is termed as being in "The Flow").

### 2. Making their discovery platform to each user more seamless and effective to use and more accessible to developing countries:
* A. Facebook news feed algorithm prioritizing user's preferences 
* B. Facebook creating their own hardware and software libraries from scratch to optimize the service running more smoothly
* C. Facebook creating a lighter version of their software for users that hold low-end devices. 

### 3. How their marketing team was able to dominate effectively from the rest:
* A. Setting a critical common goal for all teams and departments to collaborate with for promoting diversity (North Star Metric)
* B. Evaluating which assets are the most critical to keep and grow for the health of the organization (Core Product Value)
* C. Making sure people can get a good impression to the products offering as fast as possible (Magic Moment).
* D. How Facebook really executed the most out of their own idea compared to the rest of the social networks (Care more)
* E. How Facebook product life cycle reached a stage which was more immune from competitors like Google+ to clone their business (crossing the chasm)
* F. How Facebook disrupted itself with going mobile first, ventured into messaging and embracing Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality despite the big set backs (Like Amazon cannibalizing its books for the Kindle and Netflix cannibalizing its physical DVD rental for its streaming service) 
* G. How Facebook monetized advertisements by creating a state of the art marketplace where users and businesses get the best out of the experience, allowing users to dislike content that was not relevant to them and businesses able to pick to which type of users their advertisement would go.

All of the above concepts and more are narrated on the times Facebook was trying to find breakthroughs on scaling up their business with memorable characters and with great detail of the events. 

There are three things that Facebook creates a big influence on society: 
1. Facebook's mission on providing internet access to all 
2. The founder's charity and giving to the people that deserve more in this world (developing countries) 
3. Incorporating virtual reality as a part of our life.

Although I admire (1) and (2), it would be complimentary as well to teach people to learn how to fish instead of giving them a fish only. In other words, we have not finished yet our world to be civilized and maybe it will never be. I think (3), creating a virtual reality is a supplementary solution to the problems were (1) and (2) lack. There are people that are very skeptical about this (i.e. Elon Musk). Elon Musk is at the opposite end feeling people are not civilized and a backup plan is required if society screws up by not caring its own natural resources. Of course, we intervened WW2 from a nuclear holocaust and famine with the French Revolution, but should we expect we will be lucky next time when our negligence overturns us where we cannot do anything about it on our own end? Virtual Reality will create a new set of rules in the same format that we live now through a specific set of rules for how this world and our mind interacts with it. A virtual reality can provide a safe environment to experiment, but what I am afraid of is a virtual reality that locks us to a more limited form where we cannot embrace our current capacities that we have in this world, such as the ability to innovate and other human parts of our mind that reach us to our ultimate potential. Nevertheless, the safe environment virtual reality provides will be a good handicap for the people that are not very bold yet in embracing their ideas more actively in our current world.
