Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2400300933

## Finally, a book about you from a top-down perspective, but assumes you have read "Engineering Your Life", somewhere, previously in your past life.

What a great book this is! Where to start though? Designing Your Life is one of the top book's society needs to read right now but is not one of the top full comprehensive books about how to live your life ideally as you hoped for because they assume you have not only read but fully understand well on how you should engineer your life. You see, in many ways, we do know how to engineer our life totally well. We all are good at specializing in something bottom-up by putting all our eggs in one basket without a chance on designing our life as an iterative process. For instance, you learn from your family or school on the jobs that are in low of supply and high in demand and feel like you are going to win the lottery by following their advice. You put all your might on learning the skills need it specified in the job descriptions of your role during your college years and internships that you finally land a job. You become an expert on that particular job after years working hard by getting the know-how of everything about your role that everybody calls you a rockstar. If you feel you won the lottery, that is great, congratulations! Because it is a lottery! For most of the people who went on that path, some may feel different even on the surface they look successful in life. They may even cry at night and say to their inner self "Why am I doing all this?". For some others, ten years down the road, the job becomes obsolete, and they agonize with themselves against what gravity hits them and they twist the facts around them and say "Maybe if I do this, people will still want me?". Even worse, some went to a career where their perspectives were not aligned whether it matched with their strengths, getting a shock when they cannot perform well when they start their job. Last but not least, some lose hope that work will never fit under their constraints, trying to finish the game of work as soon as possible, but  once they become financially independent, they still feel empty and realize they need to fill the void by finding some work that makes their life meaningful by contributing in some way to society.  All these people in our society are in a system that overengineers us too much from job descriptions that when we die our eulogy will be qualified to be quoting from the book, "Dave had good written and verbal communication skills". So, fine, some of us, more precisely, very few us, our degree matches with our future work, and even then, later it will still have high chances it will not. So what will you do? In what state are the people who started with a failure or people who started a successful life, but later ended up as a failure? How can we describe this situation? Well, to put it all simply, they all have a "personal crisis", or a "mid-life crisis". When companies are in a crisis, you do not try to focus on what you already are doing well that doesn't produce any more value, but you try to think out of the box, to innovate, not to overengineer, or do something better to what you already do. These are design problems, that if we incorporated into our life, we would be resistant to any big changes in our life like companies can withstand and do not become bankrupt. If you worked in a company that applies innovation in their daily operations, this book is about applying what you already know for making a business add value in new ways, but instead incorporating it to your own personal life. It requires a different context when we discuss designing our personal life and this book feels that it nails that topic pretty well. We are all hypocrites if we can apply our design principles in our jobs when we cannot apply it to ourselves in the same ways companies analyze their clients' needs so much that they ignore analyzing internally the needs of the employees that are working there. So before we help others, let us help ourselves, let us be human, by designing our life.

The book's course has a lot of workbook exercises that I recommend you should be doing. In my college days, we used to do a similar workbook as the book provides, but instead of having our options open while exploring more about our own self, we only need to plan the future we already had in mind, ask five contacts for a casual interview how the job outlook looks like in those specific roles, and just hit the pedal after graduation and reach your destination before everyone else. Does it work? Oh, as counter-intuitive as it sounds and designing your life does not advise you to do, it is successful, but it definitely will not give you total happiness around it. In Chapter 5 of the book "The Power Of Habit" by Charles Duhigg, it discusses how writing down a plan around our problems makes it more easy for us to act on it later in life rather than being passive. The problem is the risk that is attributed to it as in like investing all your time into one stock instead of diversifying your portfolio. What if the thing you invested hits gravity all of a sudden? What if our perspective was twisted and it was just our wishful thinking that it would end up something we liked? Or maybe it all worked fine until 10 years later, that if I chose career X instead of Y that was not visible to me at that time cause I did not explore so much, I would have chosen it over my dead body at that time and would have been better now. Why did I not see it? Think Design Your Life as a workbook that plans ahead of your future like how a career course your college provides but instead putting your life at risk into a roller coaster ride, you have greater success in this course than the traditional ones because you decrease the risks by diversifying your options while keeping your mindset to withstand failure by  not agonizing your past choices and still flipping that coin until it lands heads. You have to understand that this book does not tell you that there is zero risk on your life choices, but it gives you a process where you can mitigate the risks as much as possible by allowing you to help understand more about yourself to align yourself in matching diversified careers that you will have to try them on before you fully commit and to still retain your head clear without agony on the failures that you will endure from the choices that you have made.

The book helps self-discover yourself by four light bulbs that you need to keep them bright in order for your own self to be happy: Work, Play, Love Health. Interesting enough, I created something similar too as a model. My four important traits correspondingly in one of my blog posts that I wrote where Health, Learning (corresponds to Play), Planning (corresponds to Work), Relationships (corresponds to Love). I still feel their wording is much better and the authors' incorporate more aspects into it than the word itself describes. I also like the additional idea that you have to track and monitor them. Once one of the four traits start to dim, its emergency mode, and you have to put your design thinking caps and sail to new territories instead of diving more faster without changing course. In order to find the root of the issue why the lights are dim, they try to find whether the values that you have to write down, more specifically, your work view and life view, aligns with the stuff you do in your daily life. Second, they also tell you to track all your activities as a diary and see how much of them motivate you or demotivate you doing while also how much you get exhausted after that so they can understand your strengths and weaknesses. How exhausted you feel is not counted in how many minutes you spent, but how much drain in your battery you feel after doing that activity. This is an important element in having a balanced life because our life is a set of activities that we want to have them all complete before we sleep and if one drains the rest of the activities that we want to do, then we have to see if we need to reframe that activity in a different way or remove it as part of our life. All these tools help in the end to find the root of the issue so then you can design a solution around it.

The solution to the problems is by letting your inner design voice come out by creating a mindmap that will bring all possible solutions you have at the start around your problems. Those ideas can help you transform enough tangible ideas for creating three odyssey plans where each can take you to a different timeline of yourself in the future (no kidding!). Then, instead of picking one and straightly commit it until the end, you just take a tour around until you are confident enough that you have met your destiny. As described before, this can be applied to everything besides what you will be working in the future. It can be finding the best treatment options for your illness or finding a new hobby that you hope you will not leave it in the middle and have wasted half your time or finding a relationship that you will not end into a breakup after having kids. These are still problems that you will not have the answers directly if you don't know yourself that much or have not experienced an illness, hobby, or relationship before For those cases, they advise you to find people who can collaborate on helping you design your life because they can have experience on the topics that you have not explored much before. Like the Three Musketeers, the solution to our problems is having a diversity of opinions about our problems by being "all for one and one for all". 

Although the book tries to give a general solution to all different problems in your life, it gives more context about your career so you do not screw it up as it is the lingua franca for being able to live your means as well for others to respect you for the deeds and contributions you have done to society. So how do you approach career? Given the United States has at least half of college graduates where they work on a job that is not related to their career and 80% of the hiring is done out of the traditional job portal, we can only conclude from here and from the book that people have to diversify their career options not based on their skills but on their strengths, as well the ability to network with others that matches with their interest in a very casual way to learn more about their work lives of others either through discussions or looking or trying out their daily activities so they can verify whether it fits to their values or not. Networking and self-discovering is the solution to evaluate your different options and know much better about others.  Formal job screening uses our prefrontal cortex and does not identify the candidate of a person in an open-ended way. Instead of an interviewer looking at their strengths or helping him where he could refer him elsewhere after learning more about him during a casual conversation, our minds outputs only a close-ended answer of whether he fits the urgent job position or not so we can get the best candidate by the end of this deadline for otherwise the company bottom-line will be affected by its current shortage of workers. Worst of all, these job positions are under the control of recruiters who are not the best to identify a potential candidate as much as an employee can find out whether that candidate is a good fit or not. The reason that happens is because in those companies most employers think that employees should devote most of the time on their work and not look for potential candidates, leaving employees so distracted with work that they cannot keep up with all the potential candidates that are coming in, leaving up the recruiter do most of the bulk work. As for skills, whether candidates have all the qualifications and experience as specified in the job description is not important as much as whether the candidate is motivated enough to work in the company. For instance, in one of the database classes, I did in my university, although I performed well, some of the exercises were so challenging to me that I just completely write down the answers provided in the blackboard while the teacher was lecturing at class without understanding completely what they were all about. When I started to work, those challenges I had in the past were not expected from my employer to know and I learned them on my own through work experience. The best jobs, in the end, are always open there for you, you have to knock the door in companies with high growth that need your talent, yet not urgently looking for candidates. Most smart companies that we hope you wish to join allow employees to talk to potential candidates  openly and casually and help other companies (which later can return the favor back) so they can overstock their work pool talent in order to not go to the last resort of being desperate by setting a traditional job opening where a recruiter will do most of the bulk process. Regardless, if you as an employee do not have much choice at this point, the authors give you some basic advice on how to hack the traditional job openings in order to stand out from the rest. Last but not least, the authors advise you to get a mentor that can help on understanding your thoughts and to be able to provide you the proper wisdom from his work experience.

Overall, it is an excellent book and something you should not miss in order to get unstuck and reframe your life by putting your design thinking caps on and come up with three odyssey plans with a lot of contexts how it will work down during your career.

What is missing this book in order to be complete? The thing that they explicitly discussed that they will not mention much around, that is, engineering your life. Maybe they need to create a second edition that says "and how to become a master so you can catch them all". I am not kidding. Not a lot of people play the game until the end. In addition, some great ideas may show a false-positive from your first impressions. It may need more effort, more and more execution, for it will ever see the other side with the light. Sometimes, you have to fight with gravity. Sometimes you have to ignore what gravity tells you and do what is in your heart without expressing the idea to others (also termed as tempered radical in the book Original by Adam Smith). This book, pretty much, does not tell you how to be a great achiever because we have too many of those in the world, many of them unhappy and do not how to get unstuck, save from the embarrassment of having to start to design their life again from scratch. For those, this is a great book to transform their lives for the better.
