Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1880283950

Want diversity? Then read grandpa Buzz first take in the start-up world.

I don't know how to put it, but this is just one of the many perspectives of seeing how the startup world in 2015 was on many occasions: Spending too much to the point it may not be visible whether all the investments will turn around. Finally, some people are starting to realize they were blind, got a pair of new glasses from the doctor, and boy how many cockroaches were they able to find out under the floor from the junk food. Who knows how much cleaning it will take before they can sell the house. All those too sweet to be good companies try to catch those caveats eventually, such as putting strict quotas for people to perform in order to keep their jobs, bringing down people to drink the cool aid as much as they can before they graduate, no different than how we put people to sleep in that old movie "Brave New World". 

Two things that are striking is how most of the money is being spent on marketing and less on the product, as well how those organization decisions aim too much on company growth at the cost of the people that try to find a good well-earned job. If catering for growth, the company seems so generous like gathering many Oompa Loompas, with the only difference that most who work there in marketing don't learn much what the factory is all about and all they do is looking at numbers and trying to push the most leads. When costs are too much, they get back to their senses that they spent too much and kick all the Oompa Loompas back to the courtyard. That is what the main message I think the author tries to point out: All the sales pitch manifest a big bubble erupting from behind. So to summarize:

1. HEART (Humble, Effective, Adaptable, Remarkable, Transparent): Start-ups should focus more on working on the product in some related way. Salesmanship may be a great step than from being a clerk and saying "Hello!" and "Goodbye!". However, would it not be better if people learn how a product works, making them more valuable employees when they transfer to a new job? The problem is not the freedom we give to people, but whether the role expands them to use more their critical thinking or not. I find our communication to others with HEART to be very important in a company culture. But it becomes pointless if the content that we work does not require us to use much of our brain. 
2. VORP (Value Over Replacement): What is the whole point of the product if people who are working for the product are on the verge? Eventually, all those 20-year-olds will eventually become 30 or 40-year-olds and will not be able to keep up doing that stunt, they will eventually dismiss of having relationships or having kids, they may be brainwashed buying products they don't need. Instead of focusing on the product, shouldn't start-ups focus on making employees the core product of the company as well? VORP may save the product's profitability and sustainability in the market to keep up a great product for a customer. However, look how cruel we are to the customer when the customer is also "actually" an employee, affecting the customer in an indirect way in the "long-term". 

However, how can some startups like Hubspot can survive with tough deadlines out of the thousands to succeed and become billions in IPO where their product doesn't differentiate much with other competitors? HEART and VORP of course. Let us be honest, the problem is not much of the product but the passive consumers not giving much a dime whether the work they are doing is productive or not. They may even have a fixed mindset that the way they do things is the best, wasting a lot of their time or effort when they didn't buy a software like the one Hubspot has. They actually don't have visibility, not even the determination to change the course of what they are currently doing. Habits are very hard to change, and if you want to change the habits to thousands or even million people to use your product by next year, I don't think that is possible other than to crank a lot of money in advertising to make it visible to the world. This is a challenging problem and I am not sure how we can transition passive consumers to act out alternatives on their own instead of making it visible to them while being a good coach to change their old mindset. Recruiting people with a culture of HEART while making sure only the ones that will be left out is those who can push the product to growth by VORP is the most reasonable team that will have a chance to become a billion company within a few years. Some companies use those tactics also to be the dominating force among rivals. This doesn't work out well in the long term for most of us who want to contribute in our world for the rest of our life or want to have a life outside of work, such as having our own hobby.

The author gives a lot of names that may end up having a bad rap. I feel kind of sad how people will perceive Trotsky these days, even though we can all admit his micromanagement was too ruthless. Telling a story of our own experiences is not bad at all, but this content will make it easy for passive consumers to use those words as a dead end for them. This blame, unfortunately, is the main reason why Hubspot and surgeons try to spin mistakes into positive outcomes. In Chapter 12  Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed, people took a tragedy of a baby's death in a blame culture, leaving more vacancies as people had less courage working as social workers for child services, making people less accountable than what the blame was originally intended. The author portraying the story to its true colors is not a problem. The problem is that it may be the same people who mindlessly need a coach to buy in on a product that they also need to be careful how they turn a message of comedy into a blame culture and placing those people as a dead end. That makes it more understandable why in the author's story Hubspot tried to spin all the negative things around. In response, we have to figure how to make a culture that uses less blame, as well companies being more transparent on their mistakes.

Grandpa Buzz heard a lot about diversity in Hubspot which he actually never saw. So if we want to have diversity, and not only doing the talk but also the walk, to not only be moral actors but follow righteousness within our HEART, listen to grandpa Buzz advice. Maybe our next startup idea that needs a real fix up is how the old generation can keep having constant joy in the work, as well any employee to have their own time on working on their own hobby, relationships or taking care of a family with children that need to grow up well or a grown family member that needs company. Aren't those more important elements than a product that most people work only advertising it instead of understanding it, in the long term? I leave young entrepreneurs who read this story up to you.
