Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1685493028

Improving our self and others with a feedback that requires no pills

Although this is a book that I partially read (mostly the first half part of the book) a year ago, it still provided me with enough information to make an analysis about it.

Revolution feedback discusses how to give proper feedback. This reminds me of Chapter 8 by Charles Duhigg's book "The Power of Habit" which it tries to illustrate just how one way to give some input that can be inconsistent to the receiver can be accepted instead of rejected if presented in a certain way, such as the sandwich effect. There was one joke in one of my organization classes where all cultures could be classified accepting feedback in 3 ways: sandwich, meat (an illustration close to that is how this book describes the style of Steve Jobs in response to feedback), or just only giving bread (cultures that give little to no change within feedback). I took a glimpse on the rest of the half of the book that discusses the variety of feedback you have to give to others by several factors, such as what generation the people are born in, so I am sure the book provides context to fill most use cases of providing feedback to others.

Feedback whole point is to change or influence the habits of others. Two important points which I have taken from this book is that you have to give feedback continuously in small chunks. You have to read how much possible of that feedback the recipient can digest. All plans require things to be done in small steps. Feedback that does not reflect reality, such as snapping about it, is not effective. The book Executive Paradox by David G Jensen shows how we should both balance being empowering while at the same time commanding with people. The second point is for the feedback to be presented as part of their personal growth instead as a dead end. It is also important that we should also be humble and admit our own mistakes, as our feedback may not be one that we should hold on in the end. The attitude and how we follow after we give feedback is important. For more about that, you can read the book Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed.

Although the second half of the book gives enough use cases to dive in through the journey on providing appropriate feedback to others depending on each use case (age, medium, etc), it is also worthwhile for individuals to have a framework on understanding others instead of only within a limited set of use cases. Understanding others is completely different to giving feedback to others. It is more like interrogating and figure out their own perspective worldviews and norms they live and "how do they express them in their own language". Without understanding their worldview, we may misinterpret our worldview as their worldview too and use words that do not align to the recipient to what we expect. Artificial intelligence tackles currently the problem by the use of Natural Processing Language (NLP). There are many technical books that discusses about that. A good book for the human reader that can start with is Clean Language by Wendy Sullivan and Judy Rees. Combine both books and you get the best dose on improving your skill on providing great feedback to others. An astounding book nonetheless.
