Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2042004908

Demystifying The Process Of Innovation In A Nutshell

I already knew what innovation is all about. I just want to get an affirmation of its importance and get the general big picture in case I missed anything. The insights the book delivers are mostly based on the interactions he had with contestants as a host of the show New Inventors on ABC-TV. Reading the book stood out to me. It captures how most innovators think and do. Besides describing the traits of an innovator, the book gives practical advice on how to use proper communication skills on expressing your innovative ideas, as well on how to apply it in your personal life and your workplace environment. Although this book may not be ground-breaking, it connects all the dots on the subject of innovation, reshuffling our priorities for innovation being a part of our starting deck card.

The book starts to define what innovation is all about. Innovation in this book has a different meaning compared to other texts. It has a broader spectrum. For most of us, we think of innovation as ground-breaking, changing the existing rules of the game, as well disruptive, making the old way of doing things unfamiliar and obsolete. In contrast, here we consider innovation as improving existing rules of the game. We use other words to describe this type of innovation: optimization, marginal gains, and so on. Usually, high executives play a big role in transforming their organization on using fewer resources (time, energy, money) for getting the same results. It is using existing ideas from other domains and integrating into the existing domain in order to gain a competitive advantage. In the last few years, things have changed recently where optimization is not the only way of adding value to our economy. A lot of startups have ventured forth on changing the rules of the game from keeping money in a digital wallet to electric automated cars that you can call them to come in front of your doorstep by clicking a button on your phone. It seems when people think about innovation these days, they think more about what startups do these days instead of how to optimize existing things. What the author intends to say is that disruptive innovation is too overrated and should not be our whole focus. We should also pay attention to improving existing processes through marginal gains. A lot of things we do is done inefficiently that takes a lot of our money, time and effort. And instead of solving our inefficiencies, we instead look at the next new thing that may not be practical to us at all. Some of the solutions to our problems may be in front of us already invented a dozen or hundred years ago. We do not pass this hurdle either because we are not aware we have existing problems in the first place or don't look existing solutions at the proper angle. 

The book splits innovation into two parts: at the personal level and organizational level. At the personal level, it discusses how innovation comes into our flow and how we can channel it so it can add practical value to our life. I think our ability to innovate is part of who we truly are. I think our ultimate potential lies there and anything else as easy to replace. For instance, the author states habitual thinking as the worst enemy for being innovative. On the old times, people did without much thought harvesting and reaping a farm. Today, most of the ground work is replaced by sophisticated machinery. Compared to the past, only a minority of the population live in rural areas. In other words, if we do not want to be replaced, or more specifically, if we really want to be humans that add value throughout our lifetime, our main focus is finding ways on spending less time on habitual thinking and more time on innovation. 

The author describes many ways to overcome our habitual thinking. First, we have to be motivated on doing radical changes on the way we do things. Gasp! Did I say change? I think what people fear most is going into unfamiliar territory. People will create a lot of excuses on defending with what they are familiar and comfortable with. It creates a friction for us to move on any new ideas. The book quotes when in 1899 Charles H. Duell said: "Everything that can be invented has been invented". Uncertainty is bad if we keep it uncertain. Uncertainty is not bad if we start exploring it to be more familiar and confident with it. The author goes through a lot of steps on how to do that from getting more context of the problem while reflecting and assessing the idea from multiple angles. It also tries to remove the most common excuses we do for avoiding innovation and pushes forward to think and do instead of procrastinating by doing what we are comfortably familiar doing. 

My favorite part of the book is the concept that innovation can ultimately come from integrating multi-disciplinary domains. As adults, we categorize items into boxes. For instance, if I talk about the Bible, I will place it under the box "Religion". If I talk about a car's acceleration, I will place it under the box "Science". We never try to mingle different boxes and see if a new idea will pop out from it or not. But believe it or not, a lot of ideas can come like that, for the possibilities of them can be endless. Another reason I can think of is that most people have never thought of doing that in the first place, meaning there is a lot of space for innovation to exist through that. Another part I like is how we should describe innovation as balloons. All popular inventors did that in part of their lifetime. In the book "Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future" by Ashlee Vance, Elon Musk could always exaggerate about his ideas and still to this day exaggerate his ideas. Even Mark Zuckerberg recent speeches about their initiatives on making the world better-connected show huge potential that several bloggers and book authors become devil's advocate of what he is saying. Lastly, I liked the idea that you have to find the end point of each idea. If the end point is not reasonable or not suitable, you have to change your strategy on bringing ideas that are more reasonable and suitable. For instance, Elon Musk wanted to colonize Mars. Instead of doing that straight ahead, he went on doing what was "need it first" before we were able to colonize Mars in the first place: SpaceX reusable rockets makes it more affordable to do space explorations by re-using existing aircraft, making it one more step closer to that destination a reality. Some people give up cause they persist on framing the idea in the same format and not changing it to a one where its goal is more easier and visible to reach. In the children's movie "Ratchet & Clank", we see Ratchet initial concept of a hero as the grandiose of thwarting evil aliens from space and being the popular idol of the world. Ratchet ultimately finds out that a hero role is not to be a standout by being all wordy while not doing any actual impact on the world (Captain Qwark of the Galactic Rangers falls into that category), but instead a hero is anyone that does some small impact on our world. In the end of the movie, after Ratchet being a member of the Galactic Rangers, he went back to his hometown doing what he always used to do before being a hero: fixing and repairing cars. The moral of the story is "What matters is the impact we can do in our current circumstances. Chances for aliens invading us from space is pretty slim. In contrast, can you imagine how many cars malfunction every day?" Maybe fixing cars will be automated tomorrow, but the moral of the story is what impact you can bring today, what is the end point of your idea. We all at our youth have grandiose ideas but then we have to be realistic. If we persist and be open minded, going through the hoops, we reach to an end point where our idea adds the most value.

At the organizational level, there is a lot of ideas how to implement a culture driven by innovation. Most of the highlights that I got from here is: 
1. Let everyone, especially your internal staff, to innovate.
2. Set innovation as part of their performance review.
3. Make sure someone is accountable addressing others' ideas and implementing the ones that will bring the most value to the business.

If you want to learn how to innovate this is a great start. Although the book is easy to read, the hard part will be to keep the doors open for innovation being part of your mindset. All you have to do is take a start on this "adventure".
