Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1684726783

How clothes boost Maslow's low motives of self esteem and the practical benefits to society

This is a great book that collided within my lifetime, as I have experienced the world of apparel from tip to toe indirectly (cause my close relatives love to buy clothes and also being in a lot of years in the apparel retail industry). Although I am a guy and I am not a big fan of clothes, the book, although being short of 30 pages, says a lot, enough to convince you that you should wear clothes in a proper way. 

I can't help every time I read this how closely it is associated with the Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg. Briefly, the power of habit describes a habit main framework is as follows: cue->procedure->reward. If you want to create a new procedure as a habit, you need to add a reward (Chapter 2). If you want to change old habits with new habits, you substitute a procedure with a similar procedure in order to get the same reward (Chapter 3). The power of habit misses how cues from the external environment (such as able to focus studying when I "stay" in a library) can be substituted with clothes (can emerge the same habit if I wear a set of science coat). This, the author defines as "enclothed cognition". Furthermore, on Chapter 8, Charles Duhigg describes how low-ties are created: Making connections with "friends of friends". However, there is other way to make acquaintances with others: by the use of clothes that make you stand out, that by peer pressure, it may sound rude if you don't compliment them in the first place. 

However, some points she makes are ones that you have to think also ethically. One of her points states that "Get your clothing right and everything else will fall into place". In other words, it follows Chapter 4 concept of keystone habits. Keystone habits means a cue, such as a cloth, can emerge you into new habits, new traits, implicitly to explicitly. Then you are able to identify that trait and embrace all the rest of the traits the new persona is associated with. It is more like a domino effect. For William James (fortunately, both this author and Charles Duhigg discuss a lot about this father of psychology), it is fair use case to empower himself with clothes when he at some point all the time thought of committing suicide. However, if we go to Maslow's self esteem, internal self esteem is more important and is also a "holding foundation" to keep external self esteem stable. However, it is hard to deny, that we all start the bridge with external self esteem in order for later on to cover our external self esteem with internal self esteem.

I totally love the concepts the author makes that some clothes make us more happy and others do not. Others make us more live in the front and others hide us on the crowd or de-individualize our self. In other words, what you wear mirrors your mental state. I do believe clothing is a science and a very important piece of science. Although external self esteem is weaker than internal self esteem, for people who do not know us, this is the only way we can represent our self. Having the proper attire shows that you have the passion, determination, re-enforcing your mental map (internal self esteem) that you are ready to collide with the external world and make a difference. Most communication happens when one person wants to stand out and do something in the external word and the only way to do that is with the help of others. The only ones with high rate of possible candidates that can contribute are others that also stand out and do something in the external world. Clothes make that starting connection/bridge. However, it would have been better if the topic of this book would have been assertive instead of only supporting external self esteem. People who show themselves hastily where in the end shows their mental map is lofty, does not represent their true character and only seek fame, become hypocrites in the end, such as what we see with many politicians, is something we should be wary of. Instead what I propose is for people to use clothes in good faith of themselves to what their actual character represents and what they could be as long they are deeply motivated by it. In other words, to fulfill their internal self esteem within the background. 

Clothes is at its infancy stages to become a scientific field. It is seen now by aesthetic purposes. But here is one author that sees the undeniable and expresses the scientific findings and observations it found and hopes one day society will do a paradigm shift from its current views. We should thank for the effort and the passion that few delve on such journey. I am pretty sure there are so many topics that we haven't covered on the science of clothes. I think the discoveries so far are just the tip of the iceberg.
