Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1293559328

Theology back to its true colors

Recent theology only views current cultures and norms of different religions and derive some understanding out of that. However, it has not based on such methodology to attribute yet a very “clear” picture of a grand explanation and purpose of our own individuality like math and science does when it describes about the natural laws of the empirical world. This book tries to attempt that human individuality can be explained if we put the same scientific thinking caps for understanding individuality (and there is even a bigger surprise what else it correlates to if we see the same objects into different perspectives than how current society perceives them due to our current partial understanding). 

This book touches and analyses theology by many events through our history, such as the great library of Alexandria in Egypt, the after effects of world war 1, the renaissance times. This book touches the topics of psychology, such as Piaget childhood development. This book touches the topics of philosophy, such as Thomas Kuhn Scientific Revolutions, Plato, Swedenborg. This book touches the current findings of Neurology and how they correlate with the cognitive styles of the theory of mental symmetry. This book tries to analyse several religions and several paradigms, such as the theory of evolution. There are so many concepts correlated with the theory of mental symmetry (a theory that he uses to unveil natural cognitive theology) that makes this book a hard topic to dismiss.

This book gives you a lot of doubts to your mind whether his statements about how the mind works whether they are correct or not. So I tried to correlate the theory with other books that talk about how the mind works, such as Executive Paradox by David G Jensen, Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed, Feedback Revolution by Peter McLaughlin, Clean Language by Wendy Sullivan and Judy Rees. Each time I read each of those books, I was able to fit the same concepts within the theory of mental symmetry, giving me more confidence that those connections are not a coincidence and instead much closer on describing the truth.

What a marvel this book is. The only frightening part after reading this book is that it can influence you to view life in different ways for the better of our world. It influences us to become the role models of society we were established to actually be after knowing how our mind originally works. 

We are still a lot of miles away for people believing that there is a theory of mind that it can tie explaining all things together all correlated with theology, but here is one of the books so far that gives the most clear picture that if there was one such theory, here is how it is suppose to be.
