Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2090111088

Unearth beyond what you visible control. A great repertoire of all you need to know to be Original.

We live in great times where not only more people have accessibility to work in start-ups that promote originality, but the skill of creativity is shifting over the skill of specialization to take over its place as the main lingua franca for adding value to any shape and size of business. Despite the author being a talented professor, consulting to many high profile companies, and balancing his life between work and personal life, with the help of his work and personal experiences, studies he conducted, and his broad readings of several topics, he managed to write a book with lessons about what an original is through different perspectives. 

To say he managed is kind of a dreadful word, to say the least. At the time of writing, he put effort on passages that we are most familiar with and has participated in TEDx and other hosts to promote the main messages of the book. The main problem is at the surface, at the size of 200 pages, the book tries to look like it's going to tell two to three memorable main highlights of being original, but as you dive down the rabbit hole, you obviously find out that it is crammed with so many concepts, that it deserved to be a 600 to 800 page cookbook (or a trilogy), so the readers could have had a 100% buy-in to its message. I am not joking you, but at the end of the book, there is a section called "Actions For Impact" that has a list of 30 items in order to be more "Original". That is the actual amount of content that it crammed inside the book. But you have to understand, from the author's perspective, this set of perspectives are illustrated in how a social scientist would use those concepts at work: findings of human behavior are not so practical if they are already given bundled as a finished house, as much delivered as lego pieces that allow you the flexibility to build your own customized house based on your own customized situation. There are great books that drill you to a specific style of house to build and just follow the IKEA instructions, but this one gives you only the pieces, and without instructions, you have to work the rest out for yourself. For that reason, many concepts of the books are not discussed much in depth aside providing evidence through highlighting past main events and the results of the studies conducted. 

Arguably, given this book comes from the academic background, research studies show up more often than from your average joe or full-time journalist, which gets some time to get adjusted to. It leaves you to wonder if on occasions whether only the main studies should have been in the book and the rest left on the footer reference, so more space could be added on explaining those studies in layman terms with charts and graphs on occasions. In addition, a lot of the stories discussed in this book come from readings that you would have done as a student through history (women rights, civil rights). Despite all that, there are plenty, and I mean plenty of stories that are business oriented, but in contrast to the rest of the journalists that write those self-enrichment books fully based on organizations and businesses, it is a nice mix this book diversified to explore originality through the historical movements as well. 

But aside the formatting and presentation of the book, the meat of the book are the lego pieces that it provides for enabling us to be original. The main thesis of the book is that anybody can be original. In other words, it focuses more on the software (our culture, upbringing, mindset, reactions) instead of the hardware (our physical brain and genetics). It shows just by changing some subtle elements of our external environment, it can influence or adapt our software to conduct more originality. This book in several chapters implicitly tries to emphasize that by putting civil rights movement passages that gave women the rights to vote and black people to be treated equally as white. At the time of writing this, there is this tension again, a war about nature versus nurture, and albeit there is no doubt the scientific revolution shifted us from nature controlling us to controlling nature, there is now this momentum of tectonic plates shifting due to social forces where our identity will not be taken into account anymore by our own physical nature, but how we nurture our self through the span of time, as after all, anything that is derived from nature can be learned through nurture. The problem will be in a stall if we focus whether nature and nurture take a bigger or lesser part of the pie instead of having a mutual understanding of the important roles that nature and nurture took facilitating part in spreading niche roles and later integrating them between the past and in our present. Only by looking at the big picture we can move on forward with the future. So in my opinion, I feel the book did not have an "authentic" devil advocate on the aspect of whether nature had a special handicap for some being more enabled on promoting originality, losing some balanced view on the merits of nature vs nurture.

Compared to the rest of the self-enrichment books, Grants conducts experimental studies, which makes him not shy to show what people would default do when they are not prepared for a situation they have not prepared before. We expect that in the future people will be more prepared to have some consciousness on making better choices, but admissible enough, we currently are not, and we look those pieces from the lens of our current perspectives society reacts through our actions.

Chapter 1: Discusses that the most successful originals have always had a hard disk backup that is less lucrative when their original production idea fails. I really have to add that risk and control (which are discussed in chapter 6 as elements usually last born and firstborn correspondingly have) are very complimentary. Usually, each confounder picks their own niche: one taking the risk and another keeping a backup plan so all bases in the business are covered. But despite different mindset perspectives on how we handle the environment, elements of commitment and domain knowledge and other factors play a vital role for a business to be successful. Otherwise, if Warby Parker did not have co-founders committed and had the domain knowledge, they sure would be trailblazing trees, but not the whole forest. 

Chapter 2: Iterates in more depth the importance of domain knowledge for getting the timing right of ideas that even if they are applicable currently, they have to run smoothly instead of a bumpy ride when they are executed. Maybe those handy middle borns discussed on the footnotes of Chapter 6 are good at being diplomatic and can fit the bill of adjusting the idea properly. For ideas that cannot be penetrated today, people have the choice to present the idea through science fiction, as after all, they become the role models for our future generations. Or if you have proven to be successful with existing ideas and you need a nod push for others to buy in, then a usual podcast would do.

Chapter 3: The first part talks about familiarity. In some sense, it is similar to the "sandwich" effect, which all studies suggest that if people always get self-bias in some sources of truth as being valid, by brand or by popular celebrity name, then if you want them to recommend them something they are unfamiliar, you have higher chances to trigger them to become active on it by throwing something familiar. The second part of the chapter discusses the four stages of changing or keeping the status quo: exit/voice and neglect/persistence respectively. It's good that he advocates to not exit an organization for changing the status quo, especially if you are very committed to change the situation, but unless you can find alternative or similar options that you are passionate and allow you to be change agents, unless this is the only roadmap and you feel it is a high priority, there may be greener pastures you should explore. Because everything is now flat and we forgot hierarchy can loom in implicitly, the author illustrates the most common pitfall juniors in this age are not familiar with: the more hierarchical the organization is, the more voicing their concerns without earning the proper experience points and not communicating through the proper channels, the less effective it will be.

Chapter 4: Discusses that innovation is more than creating new ideas and more improving existing ideas. But then again, this contradicts with crossing the chasm. For instance, Google+ social network improved organizing your connections with "Circles" and Snapchat created an ephemeral communication. Despite its drawbacks where your conversation could be your wildest fantasy, it at least had the environment of being psychological safe to discuss something you would be afraid to discuss on other social networks due to its ephemeral nature. Once a company "crosses the chasm", who will be the settler is less democratic where the best-improved ideas win. We live in an era now where companies "care" about the ideas so much, that there will be fewer occurrences where Facebook takes the space of Myspace. The last part discusses people who innovate slowly versus the ones that innovate fast. The ones that innovate fast focus on ideas that can be done now while the ones who innovate slow focus on concepts that will come in the near future or the long term future.

Chapter 5: This is a continuation of chapter 3 in what if you want to persist on voicing your opinion. The answer to that is by being a tempered radical. If you see someone being irrational by following others that do not align with their idea, it is most likely because they adjust the idea to currently fit in the world albeit not to their standards, but close to their standards. It is lowering our expectations and getting something out of our ambitions instead of nothing. Also, discusses which allies you should join with. Allies that are neutral do not have many positions and they will not stand with you, especially if they don't have any care about what they stand. Allies that are frenemies sounds schizophrenic, so unless you want to do circles, it is better to just watch grass grow. There is no doubt that to be original you have to be a good communicator to scale the idea across.

Chapter 6: Discusses how later-borns pick up the role of standing out original as a niche due to the non-existence and negligence of the role of parenting in the late stages of a couple. Discusses how more mindful and care our future original generations and their offsprings will be when parents make their children think on their own by giving discipline lessons with values instead of rules. Lastly, since a child has not made a mental framework on how to handle the world yet until they reach adulthood, role model heroes and science fiction are the pillars that can take a big part of the influence on preparing on to who we want to be.

Chapter 7: To deviate groupthink, allow a culture that allows openness on discussing with authenticity the flaws of others. We can artificially avoid group thinking by creating the effect artifacts of problems instead of solutions to the organization, which forces us to create our intentions on discussing flaws instead of having a mutual agreement. 

Chapter 8: Anxiety is part of the process on high cognitive skills that include uncertainty and this fumbling part is just a part of the process of organizing unstructured information. The only way to be motivated is focusing on the end result, sometimes exaggerated to the point it feels intangible like Plato's Forms of Goods. That means if our expected way of doing stuff does not bring our current reward we expected, we have to change our strategy through other means until we get it right. This desire and urgency of getting the reward, by all means (which always gets triggered when a business goes into crisis), avoids us on the insanity of doing the same thing and expecting different results and instead think differently to accomplish the impossible possible.

And that wraps up my perspective of the elements discussed for being original. These views are many sided so I recommend to take a read of the book and create your own version of a house out of the lego pieces provided for what an original represents.
