Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1693094949

Excellent Reference Book On How we influence ourselves with our mind.

The book goes over eight highlight traits that make people or organizations the most productive.The word productive is a weird name for me. I always feel it has a connotation of producing output better through innovation, marginal gains through doing smarter, and faster by removing any bottlenecks on the development cycle. The same principles the author describes can also be attributed to progressing our ideas into reality. If anything, the act of advancing ourselves may be the whole grand explanation of why we live in this world. I prefer that term better.

As looking into depth on the chapters the author demonstrates, they talk about a general view of different parts of the brain doing some specific stuff. The book may be repetitive to other readers as they are sources they may have read somewhere else. However, it is not about the familiarity but how regularly those concepts emerge within successful individuals and organizations. If they show a pattern, we should pay attention to it. It is a great start for those ideas to be organized with the best stories for someone else later to look those topics in more depth later on.

All the chapters interchange hands. There are connections in between. I have a hypothesis after reading and analyzing a lot of similar self-help books and independent research from others. I have a lot of chances that I may have missed something and have the wrong interpretation, but here goes: The first chapter talks about Motivation. Motivation requires not only action but also the synergy of a mental map to address complicated topics. Motivation is hitting the rubber to the road. The chapter indeed does talk about having a grand explanation when doing things. However, formulating a grand explanation is as much motivating as the bias to act. Eventually, the author discusses them within the third chapter as mental maps. Bayesian Thinking of chapter eight is the one that aids in creating those mental maps. Nonetheless, motivation alone is very sketchy. A bias towards action will not do the best Bayesian thinking. It will not focus much on marginal gains. It will instead be motivated to do something else that is more exciting. For simple problems, that works well. For complicated problems, discipline is required. That is what Chapter 4 is all about: the ability to set plans to have an extended focus on mastering a particular set of skills or mental map. Capacity to set closure helps not to be distracted by his motivation on other exciting stuff. We can see all those mental models intertwine and influence together on how we manipulate the content in what we are and believe in which represent the habits that we possess.

The rest of the chapters talk mainly challenging obstacles every organization faces. Some examples. Psychological safety is primarily a mix of my analysis of the book Feedback Revolution by Peter Mclaughlin and Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed. However, I think Black Box Thinking discusses better which organizations progress better. It is true psychological safety may make employees happy, but there is no guarantee if they stray away from the original mission statement of the company to fit their needs. Chapter 5 on managing others demonstrates the ability to trust your employees not adding technical debt. If you don't trust them, it adds business debt to the overall business. Missing those target points (business and technical debt) reduces the quality output. This chapter overemphasizes business obligations over technical debts. What matters is to have a balance between the two. Not to be too commanding to the point of accumulating business debt and not too meek that we ignore on maintaining the tasks from accumulating technical debt. Those concepts are described well in the diagram of Executive Paradox by Dabid G Jensen.

Great book in overall. I totally recommend it. Another great reference book with strong supporting statements to point out to people.
