Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26702567-stopping-the-noise-in-your-head

Mastering Anxiety For Dummies

Stopping the noise in your head by Dr. Reid Wilson paddles through your worst adversities with an interesting theory by how worries manifest to controlling your life and how you can transform them to taking back control of your life. Given the author embraces personally his theory throughout the worries that he faced to his outdoor activities, such when being a member of CHAOS rowing, to his personal bad days with a toilet, you can tell both implicitly and explicitly that his message is quite genuine.

Although the theory is very simple, it does work out well on generally removing your fears because it addresses our focus on our personal self (compare that to other self-help books which may be too lighthearted or even dismiss that topic completely). If you are too trapped within your worries or worries dominate more than you expected then this book is for you. Be open-minded to this story as it tries to be a little bit honest about what happens inside you. In general, Mrs. Anxiety has taken over you and you were praying all time with "I am one with Anxiety" instead of "I am one with the force". Your already wife Mrs. Anxiety is a different beast than Mr. Immorality. She likes to exaggerate and deceive you with noise just so she can keep sitting on the same old throne. You may have felt all your life in misery because you lost all those chances and opportunities that require uncertainty, risk, and fear. Most likely, you have something meaningful you want to do in your life or else you wouldn't be so worried. If you feel abnormal, your desire may be as simple as getting your life back from your obsessive distractions. Bring Mr. Excitement into you which tolerates the risk for obtaining your goals. Then let the force be with you, bring that executive voice and boldly make a choice by saying "I want that" while stepping into the action. Anxiety will not like that because it wants to stick with the familiar and the old and we should know that this is not going to be an easy battle if we don't believe honestly that we are and were a part of those old habits: "Yes that is the old me, sorry for breaking your heart, we sure did have some time together, but I am already engaged with someone else". Ultimately, it is a matter of faith whether you believe this story in order to control your life, whether you use the other tools you have within your mind as an arsenal. This is basically the main premises of the book that takes you from start to finish.

Now I really feel that this book is very well addressed to a more general audience as well. This formula can be applied as well to people who have worries that may not be so intrusive but can become an obstacle for moving on with their life, whether that is in relationships, career, and life. Maybe those worries are legitimate, maybe most agree that your worries are valid and that you would be crazy if you did otherwise. When I mean crazy, I mean not harming your own self or others, but maybe start up a business, volunteer on good causes, and so on. If your worries still linger for many weeks or months, then I guess we can definitely be sure that you have some form of chronic depression. The bad news is that clinical studies suggest that chronic depression in the long term won't do much good for you. If you are in that state, then no matter what others told you, it seems your executive voice wants you to do that crazy thing anyways. The thing is nobody will give you the green light. You have to be responsible for the liabilities that come ahead of you. I am pretty sure that you did enough homework on your master plan which is kept on your rusty basement that hasn't seen the light of the day. The thing is if your worries manifest so much in controlling your life, it may be much worthier to try your plan and accept the risk of failing. Worrying on those hard obstacles may become a dead end and may not let us ever to take back control of our life and see the outcome of our dreams. Let us keep in mind about that.

Let us make sure that the reader addressed is one whose mind is dominated by worries. Some examples in the book discuss athletes that do risky sports that may harm themselves. The other extreme of worry is the extreme of enjoying the fear of getting in extreme danger. In politics, we have extreme left and extreme right parties. In psychology, we have highly reserved and highly carefree people. Let us just hope that somebody carefree reading this doesn't attempt doing the next Guinness monster truck stunt record. If any of you who do not fall being a worrier in life, I know you will never become worried even if I told you, but please repeatedly read this disclaimer a dozen times: "Please don't try this at home". Nevertheless, these risky athletes give us a good role model for the worried mind. It is more like "Look how those people perform! They are outrageous!", yet we cannot even try something small on our end that may not harm us so much. We can get uncomfortable, embarrassed, ridiculed literally. However,  we can still step back up to our feet after all that. For those athletes, they may not be able to literally stand up again for their rest of their life. If we do not have a courage for the small stuff, what can we say to our self, compared to those athletes that try to do the impossible?

I don't know why you are worried in life as each of us have our own story. Maybe you watched too much "Pinky and the Brain" and saw how carefree Pinky messed up all the master plans Brain did. Then you have to wonder why they always go along together. What matters is that worrying and doing "play" together, they don't dominate each other. This book will teach you how to make worries not dominate you. This book may be one of the last to read as a homework for taking more control of your life. Or it may still be for a while "one of the last of the last" until you figure it out that you have to say "at last!".

