The book provides a new paradigm for the executive mindset to follow in order to meet the demands of our current and "await to be" needs of our society.

Many leadership books today are autobiographies or put their full dedication on a specific leadership skill. Some readers can resonate with the author's autobiography. Furthermore, specific leadership skill books can also make a difference for leaders' blind spot. However, in both cases, these books are just a "tree within a forest" of what the whole picture leadership is all about.

Nonetheless, there are a lot of leadership books in the market that create a general model of an effective executive. Admittedly, I haven't looked thoroughly each of those books, but I have a sense that most of them will be too technical or not enough supplementary for making it enough comprehensive and supportive to each author's leadership model.

In contrast, here we have a model that it looks that it has been put more effort in making it both approachable and more credible than other models I have seen. It is approachable due to providing narratives and guides that use normal words with small stories behind the background. This encourages readers to be able to make the proper links of those guides with the four functions of his leadership model. The stories on the background make the guides even more motivating for the reader to have a greater focus or attachment with the author's vision. It is also very credible. The author tries to link his suggestions by studies of research to prove his points. In addition, a portion of his stories is about his own work experiences that detail how he uses this model as a consultant. The author also has the correct criteria to delve for a general topic like this given to the fact that the author looks things in a cross disciplinary approach by providing a lot of analogies and associations.

However, the jokes end here, as we know in fact that there are other books that do the exact same thing. For example, "The extra one percent" by Rob Yeung has a model of how to be successful. You can say that Rob Yeung book can be a substitute of this book as being successful is the mantra of all leadership. Even then, few books come to this "level" of success. So we can say that this book did good enough to be side to side with other good books and put a "pat on the shoulder" and move on.

However, I do not see it that way. The "main feature" of his leadership model is about how people should "stretch" instead of "snap". It bring a new feature, not for gimmicks, but for demonstrating that it is a part of our reality. If we ignore it, the less good we will be in creating a more collaborative cohesive and mutually respected team or organization.

Let us be more clear of the author's main feature that distinct with the rest of the books. The author tries to separate different traits of being an effective leader, but at the same time, describing the dynamics that each trait correlates with one another while still being approachable and credible. These dynamics are very hard to describe in my review. You have to read the book and test the waters in real life to make sense out of it. However, one thing I can tell for sure is this: Unlike other books describing you how to be a great leader, many people cannot follow it in real life. "The extra one percent" did a great effort by describing the functions in detail of successful people, but I still believe many people could not follow it in real life because it missed to describe the dynamics of how each trait correlates with one another while not grouping several traits in a specific function. This book tries to solve these problems with its model and may definitely be a model that people will be able to follow it with less hiccups in their real life. The author describes this "relationship" of traits with the same name as his last word of his book title: "Paradox".

Another difference that this book tries to distinct from the others is that it looks success from a leadership approach instead of an individualistic approach. Things that a leadership approach focuses more than an individualistic approach is the following: How our work and communication influence the team or organization results instead of how it influences me in terms of my accomplishment and achievements. Although leadership pays attention to our own accomplishment and achievements, most big part of leadership plays how we influence others while doing our part of our own work. Society is becoming "more social" than ever before and we as humans although care about prosperity and money, we see more value to do something in this world by being "leaders" instead of being "successful for our own selves". Now that companies are moving more through a culture that represents "family" or where "every employee is a leader" (self-manage), having a leadership paradigm is more important than ever to protect the organization from its dangers.

In today's world, leadership is more important than ever before for our future of our career, our family, our spiritual own sense. For these reasons, we need a more correct and precise leadership paradigm that represents our own reality as much as possible where every beginner or experienced on this field can start this journey learning and improving the best tactics to be a better member of society. The book "The Executive's Paradox" is an approachable credible book that gives a more precise leadership model than any other past leadership models by correlating different traits of a leader as being the antonym of each other. Main topic of this book is balancing those traits.

Strongly recommended for anyone to read (especially with Holocracy coming on the horizon).
