Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1644690931

Wow, instead of seeing 3-4-5 star reviews, I see either 1 or 5 star reviews in here. It is a very debated topic, whether the simulation encoded for female thought to be different than male. I am in the same page with the author: If I had to choose to be politically correct or scientifically correct, I would chose to be scientifically correct. Why should we not be rational?

Male and Female brain (unless there is an anomaly) are different because there wouldn't be a point for our mind to be hard wired to be attracted to the opposite gender in the first place. And besides biological purposes, we now find that it has behavioral purposes as well too, as scientists now find that the aggressive components the male brain has, which the author describes, have a more internal deep purpose, it has other practical concrete examples these same circuits can be used for. For example, we see that conflict sometimes is purposeful, such as evaluating existing ideas, whether to keep them or not (i.e. good habits vs bad habits). There is no harmony by identifying and scrutinizing habits, especially taking action and disrupting bad habits, habits that usually the female brain wants to protect in most times through her communication channel, but its nature way for society to progress and improve itself.

We all know that brain development happens at the early stages within child development. If we pump up different chemicals for different regions to grow larger and others to become smaller, it translates that the female mind has the ability to cognitively focus more better on some regions while the male mind on other regions. It does not mean that both genders on average cannot access all abilities the existing mind has, it just means that some are more flexible, such as lifting a heavy weight, for one gender compared to another, and that is due to the hormones of each gender focusing on different regions to promote growth in those areas. It does not mean a male person is incapable to do what a female does. But it actually does mean there is a huge handicap for the male to gain the female skills, because hardware wise, it was not configured to have the best specs to perform that task with ease. It will definitely take a lot of more time and effort.

For those still contested, read the epilogue "The Future of the Female Brain". That article is so great that resonates with today's society. Today we focus so many women to focus on math and science, skills that the male sex has the edge hard wired, while the female sex does not. Instead of forcing women to learn skills that are alienated to their natural cognitive edge, why don't we instead focus on adding value to society (funded by start ups) that focus on fields which requires skills from communication channels of the female sex or maybe the technology sector needs to revamp on the prescription requirements for people getting on board on those high paying salaries? The author has said that women now have the time to use "their female brains to create a new paradigm for the way they manage their professional, reproductive, and personal lives". Let us instead of currently giving women "one way streets", to instead give "options" based on what they are passionate of and society in response adjust accordingly to that demand.

The other important thing is society expects more people will be single or people not having any more long term relationships. On the contrary, I think in order for an individual to use all his cognitive styles effectively, a partner of the opposite sex that is 24/7 besides, can compliment the individual as the other half identity which has no control but becomes part of the individual's "real identity" because it always follows wherever the individual is, a half identity that compliments cognitive functions that have a competitive edge, in order to be an all-star player. That potential can still be done by the individual alone, but a relationship with the opposite gender, can ramp things up more faster to accomplish the same thing.

Overall, the book is a very easy to read book that I recommend male readers, especially teenagers, to read ahead on, as it will make things so much clear, why this simulation has 2 different sexes in the first place. The book discusses the different stages of how the mind reconstructs in the female brain: child development, teenagers, motherhood, menopause. It also discusses the competitive advantage the female sex has in her communication channels, especially how much precise the attention of the input they receive through their senses. These concepts are narrated with a lot of real life stories and studies.

Along with reading Piaget child development stages, you will have a great start to understand how the initial operating system of our mind is configured based on our hardware and how this operating system gets upgraded by the structural change of our hardware through different stages of our life.

Books these days though do not talk what content we put in the operating system and what is the best way to run this operating system of our mind. I think that is the next stage we look forward to as machine learning is already in the corner. At the time of writing this review, this book is 10 years old, and it still resonates to this day. It is a great reference to understand how the hardware mind of our brain works. It is a good starting guide, I think the average teenager will grasp most of the contents of the book.

Thumbs up. Hope more readers have a more open mind on what the author says. 
