Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/1684726518

A great framework of how basic habits work, showing some of its features 

Charles Duhigg created a great book. A book that places a framework or foundation as to how our mind works within a part of our behavior: habits. Each chapter within the book brings new features of the elements of how habits works. 

Chapter 1: Addresses the nature of how habits work if they were not able to be changed by illustrating a patient that cannot change its own habits due to some mental malfunction. This chapter is basically an appetizer for people to get more interested in the nature of how habit works, but for the hardcore minded, it also addresses a lot of philosophical questions about the nature of habits.

Chapter 2: Illustrates that habits cannot be created without a reward within. Most of the habits in here illustrate of concrete nature which most the average individual is only used to. It is definitely missing abstract rewards, such as the nature of understanding and piecing things together (i.e. using this book as a framework to replace bad habits to good habits), a craving scientists quench all day to get that dopamine rush. Abstract rewards gets covered much better within the book "the structure of scientific revolutions" by Thomas Kuhn.

Chapter 3: Discusses the topic of substituting habits that can achieve the same reward. It also discusses that overwhelming emotions can overwhelm habits to act on our cues and requires very strong faith to not become influenced by it. This correlates much with chapter 8, which discusses external ties, which represent Maslow's lower version of esteem. Instead, we should replace with a higher version of self esteem, which represents foundations independent of social ties. In contrast, what we see here is a fight between two overwhelming emotions, one with the the crowd in the stadium and the event importance, another with the bad news of the coach, the latter being more overwhelming, making the Colts win the game. If there is no foundations, then whatever strongly overwhelms us can aid or fight against our own habits.

Chapter 4: Here shows that acknowledging an implicit habit and transforming it to an explicit habit results other habits that are associated with to also change itself as well too. It seems when we see habits explicitly, in an empirical form, the more we are aware to differentiate and classify the difference between old and new habits. 

Chapter 5: This Chapter talks how creating a plan for a new habit to replace an old habit makes it more likely we will act on the new habit.

Chapter 6: When failure shows that we have to replace an old habit with a new habit, this gives us the ability to either use the solutions discussed on Chapter 5 or instead just ignore and live with our old habits. The book Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed dedicates the whole topic on this chapter alone. So if you are interested, I recommend to read that book.

Chapter 7: All previous chapters discussed how to change an old habit with a new habit "from our own self". What happens if we "influence someone else" to change a habit? Then doing it in a straightforward way will create emotional pain. When we do something that is not relevant, not a habit to our self, we don't "expect a reward" when we see the cue. In contrast, we see the reward immedietly when the actual reward emerges. Habits in contrast expect a specific reward from the start of the cue, it expects a consistent input. Habits can be engulfed through our beliefs and values. For that reason in this use case, we try to not emerge the cue with inconsistent input, such as violating privacy laws, as that will create emotional pain.

Chapter 8: This book really feels that it talks about Maslow's Self Esteem between low motives which are tied with low ties and high motives which are tied with foundations that make you independent of low ties, such as reading this book's framework and using it to fix existing habits instead having a psychotherapist to always depend for fixing them for you. Low ties are illustrated here with friends of friends. But there is another way to create low ties: clothes. The book "Mind what you wear" by Professor Karen J Pine details it.

Chapter 9: Using reference of chapter 8, we see that we have a choice whether we should submit to low ties created by the manipulation of our habits by the use of marketing made by companies or become independent by using foundations such as this book in order to not succumb upon them. This Chapter's story alone is just worth for every marketer to read. It touches the topics of ethics, how so many companies are tunnel visioned on creating a less social responsible world.

I think these concepts are hard to understand without reading the examples within the book. It is a great read and it will influence your life dramatically, trust me. I just have to give all my gratitude to Charles Duhigg creating a comprehensive book which successfully became one of the top best seller books. That means if I want to talk someone about the brain, if chances they have read this book, then I can use that as reference to discuss other topics that they are unfamiliar with something they are familiar with.
