Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2020274638

A more depth in look into why some games keep us more interested than others.

Uncertainty is not a word we use in our vocabulary often. We would never wake up in the morning and hope a never ending unfortunate events that break our routine flow, nor if they occur we would react in an optimistic way of overcoming such challenge. In contrast, most of our days, we anticipate and prepare for the worst to happen. We mitigate and manage the risk, especially if failing so affects our own survival. We make our life plain and dull, for although it would be exciting to explore new challenges to face, the risk of failing is more costly than the rewards it entails.

In other words, although there is no danger in performative actions like flying from one country to another with an airplane (the probability of an airplane accident is very low), the current culture of how most societies respond to the failure of others' is negative. For these reasons, if we ever wanted to practice our skills or explore new territories, we do it in such fashion through artificial safe environments: schools, our close relationships, and meet-ups. Business organizations even created a word just for that to promote in their workplace environment: "psychological safety". 

It is sad to this day that our culture overgeneralizes the mistakes of others either implicitly or explicitly leaving us only the opportunity to test these things out through safe environments. But what hugely amazes me the most is how to this day business organizations run effectively and efficiently while ordinary individuals are not able to manage their financial and health challenges, the lowest ladder of Maslow's Pyramid. That gives enough talk why we only trust organizations and why personal individual choices are mostly not to be trusted for they have not self-actualized themselves in the first place. There is definitely some cognitive dissonance of all the uncertainty we give to ourselves on still living in a clutter, yet adding more expectations that we can barely handle. We create so much complexity to our life that we drop a few bags along the road, yet out of all this we are masters on covering it up like we have it all under control. We are great actors like Mr. Bean, just instead of being awkward and funny, we try to act our cover up in the most professional manner of all. 

For the reasons above, being aware of uncertainty and keeping the right balance of handling it is an element that at an individual level, we are not there yet, at the corporation level, we see the epitome of it, and at the game level, it exemplifies the basic foundations that we can deconstruct and analyze the nature of uncertainty that we are most fond with. Besides describing the content of the topic of this book, I also want to persuade you that the topic itself is interesting on its own as well. I am pretty sure most of us hate uncertainty, but it is our purpose on serving this uncertainty in order to become better human actors. As paradoxical as it seems, uncertainty helps us figure out what we have in control and what we do not have in control and in what ways we can have more control of something we did not have proper control previously. The book devotes in its first chapters on the topic of how uncertainty was fiddled into games and became sophisticated due to our human nature (compare that to animals where their only game is by fighting with close relatives in a non-threatening way).

The book does an analysis of several (and I mean several!) type of games that contain uncertainty: From retro games like Super Mario Brothers, simulation games like Civilization and Roller Coaster Tycoon, board games like chess and Dungeon & Dragons, as well card games like Magic and poker. Did I mention about minesweeper? Discussing them all in here will instead spoil you all the fun for reading the book in the first place. What is interesting about the author is that he describes these topics in a very simple manner, that for as long you are familiar with the games discussed, there is no much academic rigor that you have to get accustomed to. 

It does though have a lot of terminology on describing different states when engaging a game (breaking the flow, grognard capture, fiero) to the different types of uncertainty that exist in a game (performative, randomness, analytic complexity, player unpredictability). However, once you get used to the terminology, you will find it later useful when analyzing a game. Let us say you and your friend start a discussion about the game "Faster than Light". The terminology that you learn in here will help you to express your ideas better. 

Another great thing about the book is that the author is as much objectively as possible on the topic of uncertainty in games. It will not discuss for instance on how bad social games have become by leaving l33t gamers to pay in-app purchases out of a casual game where you have to ask your "friends" for help. It will instead tell you why social games were successful to a specific demographic, leaving other factors to be another topic for another book.

The book can bring you some nostalgia and new insights. When I was a teenager, I really did not have a definition of what a game represented, but one of my close classmates already knew the importance of uncertainty in games. When I played a role playing game with a walkthrough, my close classmate would be upset for ruining the experience of figuring the analytic complexity and hidden information by myself. The same upset feelings were exposed when I showed to him the game Xenosaga to him: A game composed of 30 minutes of cut-scenes for every 5 minutes of gameplay. After all, what I show to him was not a game, but a Trojan horse impersonating as a video game on the game cover. Once you pop the disc in, you will see its true form was no less than watching a CGI movie. To call a game, a game, it requires the individual to have some interactivity to its world, and this one had practically little to none. I was still baffled to this day why I have not realized it yet. Also, another insight I came up after reading this book is whether a person who plays a game is actually a player or designer. For instance, my wife has low tolerance or patience on accomplishing challenges on Roller Coaster Tycoon. She cannot wait all the time it takes to build and unlock assets. For that reason, she plays it in sandbox mode. She plays the game for the satisfaction of creating the nicest theme park. In circumstances where a person has no uncertainties when facing a challenge, it is more best to say that my wife designs something over a game instead of playing something over a game. In summary, just because the title says its a game from the box does not mean it is a game or would be played as a game.

In the last chapters, the author concludes that as long we provide the right balance and mix of uncertainty, we can turn a boring game interesting. But beyond renovating a game in order to be successful, we should wonder if games bring any practical benefit to our life other than the release of stress. There are great questions that can be derived from this book, such as:

1. What skills and information should we gain from games through uncertainty (performative, analytic complexity, unknown information) that compliments our future career, as well be resourceful and better human actors through society?

2. We always model our life with purpose. Ergo, we have "game theory" that describes the game of life. Should uncertainty be perceived as a positive component instead of a negative component to our life? Just think about it: If everything was settled to us from the start, our software, our culture would have stayed intact and we would still be cavemen eating maple leafs while watching grass grow. Which society would you prefer to live: Cavemen? Your present culture? The future? If uncertainty did not exist in the first place, we would not have been driven both at an individual and collective level to improve ourselves and understand our world. Should we change our mindset on how we handle uncertainty?

3. Exposing uncertainty on our background activities can break the flow of such activities and make them more interesting, such as in our relationships and workplace environment. With the right mix and balance, can uncertainty expand to our personal life as well?

If you want to improve your game for keeping players engaged, "Uncertainty In Games" by Greg Costikyan will give you the basics to get you started. It is also an excellent read if you are a gamer and want to know why you love playing games in the first place, as well figuring how games can compliment, incorporate and extend on our personal life.
