Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2012681212

A perfect read for anyone wanting to get a general big picture on the importance of data.

WWD or "Winning With Data" gives a general prescription for today's world on how to take hold of the world heavyweight championship belt. The prescription is simple: The more a company embraces a data-driven culture, the more its products and services will contain a competitive advantage from the competition. 

Most people who are not seeing their tidings may be reacting right now and saying: "I use data every day! No matter our effort, we are still back to square one!". The problem is not the effort of "using data", but how an organization "processes the data" more efficiently and effectively. That is why "some" start-ups "actually" disrupted big behemoths organizations: They found a weak blind spot, they nailed their target on it by grinding their teeth real hard, and just like Rocky, took over the longest reigning champion in the last round. But this used to happen all the time. Just slower. Unlike the past, our present economy is more open to bringing those disruptions with less red tape. 

So you understand what the problem is? Processes. Organizations that can bend the rules of their current processes are better off. What is the point of benchmarks comparing yourself if you can't change your own benchmark in the first place? After all, as Einstein well has said, "Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again". Which brings us to the main point: Your organization may doing very well being "data-driven", but maybe not so "data-driven" like others do. You see, some stay in a stall state and don't innovate to be more data-driven than they used to be. For most organizations, most should now be miles away keeping their databases stored in document files in magnetic disks (yes, literally files! But they saved us like an eagle during the world wars!). However, a lot of big companies still lag a lot on making their data-warehouse compatible with their flat and decentralized organization structure. Whether human or robot, data is the bread and butter these days for taking track of your actions and making better decisions. It is part of our survival. Ergo, the main thesis of this book is that most employees face their data problems like a huge queue waiting to get their soup, bread and cheese portions like those breadlines during the great depression. 

So what is going wrong? Hello, you are employee #542. There have been many iterations of making data more accessible before you came here. In the old days, big boss was around, wanted some numbers, somebody is in the terminal, and he gets his results. God forbid, let us hope the guy behind the terminal knows what he is doing, otherwise, he will soon to be fired if five years later they found out he got the numbers wrong. But employee #542, there is another company XYZ that handles data better than you. You see, the people who work behind the terminal don't prepare static reports and dashboards all the time, they give access to enough raw data that you are interested and that you can play with, maybe not so easy like a Google search engine, but fun enough like playing a game of civilization. In other words, the author says that data warehouses are evolving in such a way where employees can have the data they need with the least red tape in order to make their own decisions and explorations. With the advent of many business intelligence tools, the person behind the terminal is more responsible for collaborating all departments for the definitions of all the metrics everybody can agree on and having all the allocated bandwidth and expertise for making that possible. This leads to a domino effect: Once an organization lifts the barriers off for anyone being able to access data, you turn the wheel 180 degrees to the type of employees you want to hire in your company. No longer you want employees that comply about "enough is enough" on their data requests. Instead, you want to have curious employees (also called "Googliness" in google) that always ask "Why" while backing up all their opinions with "data". 

Congratulations! About now, we just discussed what the book is all half about: The problem, the background, the big picture of how data has evolved over the years, and how to get back on track to the latest trends with data. The last chapters discuss supporting elements for a company to be an enabler of a data culture. Firstly, have some data literacy classes in your organization. At the time of writing this review, Airbnb, the world’s largest accommodation provider that owns no real estate just announced their own "data university" to its own employees. If you don't teach people to be more literate about data, not only on how to gain access to data but to also making their hypothesis sound, does that not sound like a red flag? Second, data that is not practical and relevant can be a waste of effort if it deviates from the company's vision. For example, some companies make a basket case by spending more time over a $10,000 bike rack debate than proposing new functional features that project a churn rate drop by 20 percent over the next year. Like the old bible saying goes, "A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius". However, if an idea is not very clear whether it is worth hitting the rubber to the road, most innovative companies try to explore their assumptions with more data in order to get a more clear picture. The last chapter tells us to write our insights as stories. If you have the data right, and you know you are right, and if your audience is only awake by mesmerizing them with a good old parable story, then mesmerize them. It is good to show your passion out. After all, they will find out sooner or later whether you are the real deal or just a bluff. 

Yes, the book has a face value of advertisement from the personal experiences of the author to the data software in his workplace (Looker) that enables anyone to become a data rock star. Nonetheless, whether you just punch numbers or you work inside a terminal with the nuclear launch codes on your pocket, if you still don't have a big picture how data was and how it is and going to evolve, then this book is just for you in order to get started.

With health trackers on your watch and better financial management and advice on your pocket, we hope, that not only companies will start winning with data, but single individuals too will take over their life with making better lifestyle choices as well. Let us all take part of this and see how all this unfolds.

