Reference: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/2400302885

## Looking at money as a new diet: Instead of money trying to fit ourselves into something that we cannot unbuckle our bellies, we should make money fit us as wearing comfortable clothes.

## Intro
The book money or your life is an excellent read to get some great recipe where you will not have to worry about money ever again. For people who have lived in a developed world or the most expensive cities to live in, I think this is more challenging compared to someone who has lived a humble and thrifty life. The lifestyle or at least the privilege of having an entry ticket to live in those areas that are expensive usually is not equivalent to the worth in proportion the benefits someone gets on behalf back to what is placed at stake. Usually, developed countries suffer the most in depression, anxiety, and have higher percentages of getting mental diseases. Although many researchers have the hands folded for how developed countries who are well educated can grow to such illnesses non-develop countries rarely encounter, I definitely am confident that is the main root of all our issues: Placing their lifestyle into the highest bar of a human can possibly attain. In most cases, this is not sustainable and the individual is on a spiral loop of desperation, struggling to keep that bar to remain at the top. Why can we keep the bar lower? I think countries are starting to realize that and governments enforcing some action to this epidemic. However, some people are still dumbfounded from common sense on retaining people on keeping the bar high when they do not realize the externalities that produce. Stress is a great thing a human possesses. It is where all innovation and optimization stems from. From how we invented new devices like computers and cars and how we made those innovations to become faster and consume less energy for the same output, it all gets derived from the effort people put on those transformations. Yes, transformations are the correct word to put it. When countries don't have plenty of resources (take for instance when Japan was at poverty), they had to work hard to deliver something that does not come out directly. For instance, harvesting fruits is a simple direct task that does not require a lot of effort while converting raw material into energy that can be supplied everywhere and purifying water requires some intermediate actions that need to be invented by the ingenuity and effort of our own. Case in point, some countries, do not have a choice and have to live such a harsh lifestyle but that unfolds a lot of repercussions to what happens when such a lifestyle becomes the norm. If there is too much stress, people will be less satisfied with their life even when they have accomplished more stuff than people who are extremely happy with their few accomplishments. People will not have the luxury of taking care of family and raising it well, or if they do, they will do it improperly, as they have to juggle too many things at once. Honestly, these countries will lack manpower if they cannot have space to create a lifestyle where creating a family is a virtue instead of a vice, and so their culture will slowly fade over and end up to be more multi-cultural. And when I mean multi-cultural, I mean only within the scope of people who are happy to live a single life in there. If you live in a developing country, things are easier to get at a higher bar as you have not reached the highest bar a human can attain so far by putting yourself on the right track of learning and doing stuff that is currently on demand to this world, but at the same time, if we engage transitioning ourselves from living a way of becoming a person of being thrifty and humble to one that of luxury and we have a hard time getting back to our old well-laid self, then it is the same trap as being born as a citizen in a developed country with limited resources, but this time the challenge is not a physical constraint within the civilization we are living with, but something that it got manifested by locking ourselves into a specific frame within our mind. Either way, whether it is physical and mental, there are ways to get out of it, but all of them do not involve a shortcut. To us, this thing of making our life unsatisfied is a living thing that always wants to be unsatisfied because it still wants to hold the bar that high as like taking from a child a teddy bear apart and the cries it will ensue. For better or worse, we should be humble and not be of denial that there is a small living thing inside of us that reacts with emotions and was never evaluated whether those values are the ones that we got from birthright make sense in the first place or not. People who know how to prioritize what is important and not important know the difference of people who do not know what they should prioritize in their first place. They would usually poke some of their personal buttons and see how they reaction unfold later when you take something that is not important to realize if that individual has the cognitive capacity to have the level of prioritizing to what matters most instead of being a hoarder of things. Keeping things to a minimum or at least simplified where you can deliver most out of the lot is what matters when managing everything under constraints. Our life has a constraint. At some point, we will die, and the seconds are ticking like a time bomb. So let us get back to the problem: It is true that countries that are already on the top will always be challenged and getting into a lifestyle of luxury can become a challenge to get back to your original roots especially if you are influenced by your colleagues, friends, and family. But at the same time, this curse is a blessing, because it challenges us our cognitive skills on whether we are able to prioritize what is the most important thing in our life that will ultimately make us happy instead of doing something that is beyond our limitations and be unsatisfied for the rest of our life. In the end, it makes us a better person, it makes us teach a skill like walking, albeit this one is more challenging. Eventually, this stuff will be picked up as we age or heaven forbid we get into an accident. We will have less energy, less capacity to do what we could do before and limits us to do what we were possible to do before, leaving us no choice but to prioritize to do things only that matters the most to us, resulting into a more minimal life. If you contribute to society, you will find out that besides not able to raise a family, it can even have consequences on your workout when they are not prioritized. What happens when things are not prioritized is like placing few cells of your work on a specific task instead of many cells working on a specific task. If cells were considered people, it all entails the quality output of a result. As discussed in the book Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed, when few people work on a specific task, they are considered matters of an expert on a specific subject and have high liability for the project. These projects are unrealistic feasible due to the limited resources. Limited resources stifle space for creativity and the pressure puts individuals into a position that in order to retain their bar still high (that is, they are still matters of being the expert), they have to bend the rules of what is actually happening and show overconfidence of their accomplishments. In contrast, by placing enough resources to a specific project, not only is there ample time for creativity, it is embedded in the peoples DNA because it comes naturally out of it and not out of the impulse of others. All in all is all about putting the right balance of stress to each of us, not too much, not too little, just the right fit. As I said, this book is not about money, it is about life, it is about how to use resources efficiently to be aligned to new values that you will be satisfied instead of retaining old values that keep you unsatisfied. So this book is not about just saving money. If for instance, you want to live short and thrift when you get old? Then great, it is up to you! At least you were able to align yourself and planned it ahead of time, that is what matters, or at least you know what you will expect in the future. Or maybe a better option: Maybe save much, but not so much that it becomes too challenging for you now, but enough to have a cheap lifestyle, then you can settle that too! What is amazing about this book is it does not dictate you (but ideally tells you that you can do it) that you should have a future luxury life by limiting much to what you unnecessary do now (also called as becoming financial independence or FI for short), but it aligns your present and your future, and if you want to have a plan between your present and the future to have a different flow (that is, create a transformation change to yourself to new values of being a different person to what you where before) than what your current flow is, then here is how, especially if you feel very unhappy to what your life is right now. So this book is all about a plan. A plan to change your future to see a different me that is unsatisfied which did not encounter this book. Doesn't matter what age you are. Let us say you are now actually 70. It is like saying: Boy! Let me imagine I was 80 years old at some point in time and I came back in time to when I was 70 and I am reading this book. Will this change my future me being more satisfied than what I imagined? And now that we got all the motivation to realize that managing resources effectively affect all the key touch points of how our life will ultimately unfold, it is time to get the gist of how all this plan is sorted out. Here we will be talking money, but you can replace money with any other word that has constraints. Time is a constraint. The number of people in the world is also a constraint. A natural resource is a constraint. The capitalist system is all about the word "limited resources" which is a big constraint. Limited resources do not mean the equivalent to the end of the world as being in a vault with limited water. It means the ability to realize that we have limited time and we should spend that time wisely to get to a bottom line. And there are two ways to do that: Spend our time on more useful stuff and reducing our bottom line to something that can fit us where we live with enough stress, but not so much stress that we get into a mental breakdown. The plans described in the book are:

## 1. Figure out your earnings and net worth
This is more like doing an inventory reconciliation to yourself. It is like getting a clear snapshot of yourself by removing all the fluff and gloss stuff over the film reel that we distorted in the social networks and get the big shock to yourself and get a palm on your face when you finally realize that you are understocked. Fear not, that is normal, after all, if you are unhappy, that emotion means misalignment, and most likely, your environment behind it should be in misalignment, only you did not realize it, because for so long we were in denial. Companies don't fool around with their net worth, they capitalize and expand it, and reach to higher and higher bars, but people, most people expect they can follow the same pattern as companies do by raising their own bar. Companies can raise the bar because they can get more resources, more people into their vision. When one person gets left from one company to another, one unit is lost and another unit is gained. It is a trade-off, we still have the same constraint, the population will always be fixed or at least will not double overnight. For you, you live in the same single unit for the rest of your time. Your mind does not become double, it always remains the same. So get down real to yourself and see out of your earnings, what is your net worth, how much space is left to invest in yourself and your future and whether it makes sense to keep the bar still high to what you already receive currently. It is time to stop having cognitive dissonance of your past being perfect when the past is a product of what you live in your present life.

## 2. Keep track of all the money
In order to macro manage your future, you have to start to micromanage your present life. And the best to know about your life is ultimately your past record which idly runs its old habits that you are unaware of like your hand pulling to your head to scratch something or protecting your head with your hands when you fall down. It all seems natural to you, but it was developed from something from the past. This is the power of the trajectory of changing your life by looking at what you did recently. Look how we advocate someone that spends to save. Governments want people to save on using natural resources more efficiently. They usually do that by advocating what the average household spends and how you can reach that too if you are overspending by providing you the best practices. But they do that usually by giving you a report with all the details of what went through to your billing cycle so you can find the root of the issue. Currently, the billing cycle does not have tags where each power cord goes through and says, "You spend $40 this month with a tag name called air-condition", but do you see how useful it is when getting so granular in order to find the root of the issue? Only with more details, we will have more visibility of what is happening. And having that keystone habit of tracking is a prerequisite to unfold on fixing the stuff that drains us the most or else the last thing we want is to blindfolded spend a lot of time through trial and error to what went wrong as in to say "Oh, I turned the TV off all the time and the bill was not cut into half. Not only I lost all my entertainment, but I also didn't save any money by doing that".

## 3. Convert money to hours of life energy and categorize them.
Now what we earn is converted to energy gain. And what we spend is an energy drain. Think of it is like a balloon. All the money you get is the pumps you receive to blow a balloon. Then each balloon represents a color. Let us say red is going on vacation and blue is spending yourself on education. If you see red balloon is triple of the blue balloon, then you have to ask yourself is it worth it for me to spend all my time I earned to vacation? This is not a universal question. It requires context. It is up to why you need that vacation? Does it make you happy? Does it make you useful? The same applies if education happens to be the big balloon. Does it make you more fulfilled with more knowledge gained? Does it increase your job prospects? Right here, you are just plotting your details into insights, into big picture about you, you are analyzing your own data. Only you can figure that out on the next step.

## 4. Find out if the categories spend align with your values
The challenge here is to understand that you are on crossing points. It is between the difference of being unaware and unconsciously doing things in life to having a clue why this is all happening. Maybe is because other people expected you to pressure you and conform to those standards or norms of the people that you have been tagged and got accustomed. Now you cannot turn against the truth and act innocent about what you have witnessed. From here on, you have to deal with the guilt of not doing anything about it and accept that you are a fool for living an unpleasant life in the future or you do a transformational change by putting a plan on cutting which categories you don't value anymore so you can be more satisfied with your life with less stress. There are no more twists that we can do ourselves and its up to you from what you learn here, whether you start doing them and become a different person to what you were before. Relationships with existing people will change. You and others that are tied previously to a common cause that is now realized it doesn't cut out any more will both feel anguish and in pain like a living thing is eating you out within the skull of the brain, screaming for earning the last supper before it famishes and dies. Definitely, a person being different, doesn't happen overnight, it is not memory loss, its always in transition, with emotion and anguish until it finally isolates like having a bad break up or a grief of someone dying (the five stages of grief is an excellent theory of how it works). This book will not help you like a nurse doing all the tasks for you to undo your past self in order to be another person of being. They will not do this transformation. It is only up to your choice. It will only teach you about it so you can awaken you from the deep slumber.

## 5. Create a chart of your income and expenses that you can see your progress every day
Like I said in step 4, things do not happen overnight. They always happen in small steps. Having a chart will keep you track of your progress to see whether the different tactics you choose to transform yourself get closer to your goal or farther to your goal. It is also a good way to make yourself future proof of yourself to not let your idle habits stray on the wrong path. It was never about expecting you will always be an ideal person on managing your expenses, it was all about realizing them before they become too big that they are harder to fix later on. It is all about caring for being resourceful and being watchful of it and having ownership of it instead of going things with the flow and being confident without evaluation that you are going on the right path when you may not. We should be honest that there is always an opportunity that we are wrong and the best we can do is monitor it instead of being overconfident and having cognitive dissonance about it.

## 6. Value life energy by minimizing spending.
As discussed before, most of us live in a high bar that is unreasonable to keep, let alone to have enough for our future where we will be more limited as we age. So one of the tactics that always work on going to the right trajectory is by living by less than what we need. If the red balloon we discussed doesn't do much value in terms of satisfaction of our life for the present and the future, it is ideal to cut it out as discussed in step 4. Step 4 was the realization and a normal cleaning. Step 6 is the implementation or a more deep cleaning of the root of the issue. There is a lot of time waste that we feel unsatisfied so we should not do it in the end. If you are one of the few people who have internet and can have basic water and heating and food, imagine how most of the population that lives in poverty have to deal with those issues. If they can still survive with those issues, how can you not survive with requiring those layers of extra expenses that do not make a dime on making your life more satisfied? It is better to identify those expenses and cut the most that you can live without, that although it may cause some displeasure, you can replace that time with something with more pleasure.

## 7. Value life energy by maximizing real income.
Still, the whole reason for cutting expenses is because they do not give you much content after all. In that case, it does not mean you cannot replace with something else that you think it will make you feel content, but you cannot afford it now. For some, this is a big motivation for initiating this plan of becoming financially independent. But ultimately, this income is more for purposes of backup, for raising a family, for retirement, and any emergencies.  But on the other hand, maybe as a child, your family did not do your Disneyland trips and it is time to do them now. I think the point is most people when they are fat, and they do a diet properly, they don't end up to become fat again later. They don't need to do Disneyland a second time. It just doesn't work, once you find all the benefits of being skinny, or in terms of money, having fewer obligations and stress from your job to chunk more revenue for your big expenditures, the happier and satisfied you will be. The ultimate goal is to do your job properly where you don't have enough stress anymore, where you can speak your mind out where you work not for the money or a raise or promotion but for what is right at the current situation within the workplace, or even better, you can choose to work on a company for a bigger cause for a smaller pay than what you are currently doing if it delivers more value to society. The point is when we say you "can do whatever you want", we don't mean you gain this right on the job from birthright, or you become financial independence out of a lottery, otherwise, it will have been chaos like a boss baby crying around. We mean you "can do whatever you want" in the job you work because you graduated, you became mature, by understanding how the world should work efficiently and you evidently you mostly showcase it with how you made that chart over the years drop the cost over the existing revenue you made and now you work on a job not much for the money anymore, but for its meaning that it will deliver to the world. But still, as your chart is most likely not up there yet, and your skills are not matching with what you get paid, you should express your concerns and match with what you bring over to the table. If otherwise, you get fairly paid or overpaid then it is a red flag and you have to align with the recent skills and expertise that will deliver more than what you need without crossing the line and making yourself and others more stressful than they need so you can save them as a backup to create "your own story".

## 8. Getting FI: Post your monthly investment income on a wall chart.
The monthly investment represents a possible passive monthly income from your savings account. Please pay attention to the word "possible". What we focus here is the existing savings, not investment you are doing now. Once that saving money on its own if placed later on a very low-interest-rate that we can definitely get (say 3%) has the ability to reach over the threshold of your monthly expenses,  which should be easier when you cut your current expenses multiple times as well increasing your income as discussed from previous steps, then you can live a life of not working assuming the expenses remain constant. The tip is of course for the expected possible passive income to be over the expenses as your expenses may fluctuate on out of the ordinary surprise events within your life.

## 9. Invest your capital to provide safe investment income
The last part of the advice is to invest, but ultimately, it comes last, and not first, because of what's more important is to spend less, earn more, not the other way around where current advertisements come where they say that you can spend everything you want and the investment will be like trees unfolding free money to you and you don't have to worry anything about it and everything will be taken care out of you. Most of the magic happens from changing our own behavior, not the other way around. Gaining more capital was never about investments in the end but a trial to ourselves on proving ourselves on being more efficient in how we use our current resources. Otherwise, no matter how much we get out of risky investments, they will get depleted immediately fast with setting our lifestyle expectations bar to such heights. Nonetheless, compounding helps a lot on growing your existing savings exponentially, but that is as long being patient of its effects, as they become better over time. Last but not least, since most of our magic happens to ourselves and not from investments, it gives us advise to invest safely that can aid in our financial well being without putting all the funds in risk that you put all your toll and effort by playing the lottery.

## Conclusion
Great book overall. It does not only tell you the basic foundations of the psychology behind money, but it also tells you how to resolve it and take control over with it with on its latter steps of the program. Overall is a great book to read, but you won't get much out of it in the end as much doing the steps, which will wind you to be stuck for a while until you decide to end up compromising your old self for a new self. Whether you want to do a real transformation with the relationship of money which is how we make ties to the rest of the world is up to you, but once you get the picture the book portrays about it, it will be difficult to remove it from your head the following sentence: Money can either drown us or lift us up, it is all up in the end in the way on how it gets managed. 
