**Original Article can be found at @washingtonpost:** https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/i-used-to-think-gun-control-was-the-answer-my-research-told-me-otherwise/2017/10/03/d33edca6-a851-11e7-92d1-58c702d2d975_story.html

I cannot argue the benefits gun control has to prevent accidents, suicides, and mass shootings from happening. As technology automates most of our daily tasks, the craft of executing mass shootings will be more sophisticated for the nefarious and we must be vigilant about it. Gun control adds enough friction for people being less motivated and thus less initiative in owning a gun. Murders will not be prevented by guns as there will always be another means a person can kill someone else. Unlike guns, those murders will be harder to be executed as the rest of the weapons that are used for murder require a lot of training and physical force. Unlike guns, they will have less power on taking more people out of the rest of the weapons as they need to be in close proximity. Cases in other areas have shown that adding friction prevents people from violating the law. In our physical life, we secure a house or a car with locks and alarms for the prevention of theft. In our digital life, we keep our operating system and critical software up to date for the prevention of being hacked. Imagine if we did not have these things in the first place.

Nonetheless, all this friction only prevents people to violate the law. It does not change the motivation of the person on finding new alternatives on committing their misdeeds. We are patching the problem instead of fixing the source of the problem. We all are born with an empty state of mind. It is not the genetics that made these people become serial killers. It is through the experiences that they went through and the way they reacted that manifests their current mindset. We have to train people on emotional intelligence and a society that promotes people being motivated for the right reasons. Food for thought: How can we make people self express their emotions that they go through in a safe environment? How can we motivate people on being rewarded by doing something good for society instead of escaping our reality by playing video games or watching movies that promote violence?
