**Original Article can be found @cityam:** http://www.cityam.com/241753/matthew-syed-what-doctors-pilots-and-f1-drivers-can-teach-us-about-failure

*(If my comment cannot be found, then it means that they removed it)*

I agree everything whole heartedly of the above except of the example of Amazon. Amazon shows that it accepts customer complaints (opening the black box) to make its tasks (processes, platform, product) better, but in terms of people, the employees, they treat their feedback as the Pandora black box traditional hospitals do. To back this up as most of the people are unaware of, there is a site called the face of Amazon: https://sites.google.com/site/thefaceofamazon/ which has a collection of news articles and testimonials about employees bad experiences in Amazon. 

Amazon does not show traits of using the black box to its employees. Firstly, they do not bring a beginner mindset, such as private investigators airlines do. They do not try to bring someone to look at inside their offices of what is "internally" happening. A lot of articles on Amazon emphasise how they try to avoid unions at all costs. In addition, instead of solving the problems of employees disputes, they give severance packages in order to conceal the truth, which most of the testimonials within that site attest to.

In this world where everything becomes automated and becomes more monopolistic, there is less choices for where the individual can work to. We live in a similar industrial revolution era, and we need a paradigm shift not only on how we treat tasks, but especially on how we treat the core of people themselves. Even great journalists and writers talk about this such as this one: http://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2016/04/05/why-everyone-must-get-ready-for-4th-industrial-revolution/2/#b310be240c8c

If I want to be metaphorical, at first we lived like blobs, all inhumane, doing farming and to the same extent the same while working in factories. Now we have intelligence, but only to serve the master of our customers, which do not think in Immanuel Kant deontological terms, such as in this case, they have full negligence of the treatment of Amazon Employees (this article is in the lenses on how we people use Amazon, not in the lenses if we lived and worked on Amazon). This is an anomaly and it must be fixed, as customers natural impulses are driven by this current paradigm on cheaper products instead of what implications that does on the background. There should be a balance indeed.

No offence, but to put it metaphorically, we perfected science except reducing one number, understanding the human component in our system, that is, we choose to let the beast to do whatever it wants instead of taming it. If you guys saw the movie "money monster", this is just an example of peripheral thinking and here we present it as a role model example. Rather than treating it as a constant anomaly, a paradox, we should treat it as an anomaly that can be solved with a new paradigm. Like Thomas Kuhn have said, we cannot leave an existing paradigm without having an alternative paradigm to substitute with, a paradigm that will have to reconstruct everything that we see today (otherwise it is a fluke). I am trying to achieve that so join me in my quest, as you can always find me on my twitter account softdevlife.  The first step is being aware of the problem, not destroying the existing paradigm. The second step is constructing a paradigm that will substitute the existing paradigm.
