**Original Article can be found at @grammarly:** https://www.grammarly.com/blog/jerks-on-slack/

Some people use dots at the end on purpose, adding not only a dot but many dots trailing at the end. I am a believer that framing an idea in a rational way that people can comprehend the urgency and impact of the matter is much better than adding pressure to a request with a lot of dots. I guess the best way to avoid adding so many dots in the conversation is to pick up problems before they are already on the top of the boiling plate. Otherwise, we would snap instead of looking at the situation in an objective way by looking things from different perspectives. If we still have to express our anger or frustration to others, it is better to express it explicitly, such as "I am very upset" in order to avoid misunderstandings. Still think twice if the thing you plan to express will upset the recipient. We should always treat people and situations as opportunities to grow instead as a dead end, so whatever you do, frame the message in a way that the disagreement does not burn any bridges.

I think the problem can also not only be the dots annoying. I think the other problem is people asking close-ended questions instead of open-ended questions. Close-ended questions expect a short answer from the recipient that can create an opportunity for more misunderstandings, such as the above example illustrated. Besides people more willing to reply with a dot at the end, there are people that reply with short abbreviations, such as the word OK being truncated to K. These shortcuts on replying can create misunderstandings whether the recipient is upset or lazy in their typing when asked to perform a request.

You are right that expressing mistakes on a public channel are a very tricky topic to handle. It all depends on the organization culture treatment on mistakes. If mistakes are taken as a lesson opportunity to grow ourselves instead as a dead end of our career, if mistakes are promoted to be disclosed for our personal growth instead of placing blame on others, then more people will be open on disclosing mistakes.
