**Original Article can be found at @dataquest:** https://www.dataquest.io/blog/sql-intermediate/?utm_content=bufferbf8d3

### Great POSTGRESQL Intermediate Concepts Provided, Especially With The Python Template Provided
I tried to skim through the article and it seems a great contender for those individuals setting up SQL in their command prompt environment. I think what this tutorial stands out from the rest is the python code template that was incorporated for visualizing, querying, and executing commands within the database.

### Some Examples Could Be More Elegant With Window Functions Instead of Scalar Functions.
Although a lot of the examples above are not practical (i.e.why do I need to group by company when I filter already by the one and only one company Citibank in my where condition?) and non-intuitive (instead of using max multiple times, an intermediate SQL user that uses POSTGRESQL would use window functions which they run after the aggregated columns are computed in the result set. In other words, I would have added an additional column within that select statement, such as `ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY company ORDER BY complaint_count DESC) AS R`. Then you could get the most complaints per company on zip code level by filtering out of the subquery with `where R = 1`). Never mind that window functions sounds like an advanced topic, I take it that this is a _lorem ipsum dolor sit amet_ for getting things done over important intermediate concepts within SQL and I should be more light-hearted around this topic.

### Aside Subqueries, Introduction To Temporary Tables Would Be Great For Intermediate Users, Especially For Unit Testing. 
Talking about subqueries (or common table expressions), they are totally great for the users I provide less privilege on creating temporary or physical tables on databases. When I first had to maintain others' queries using multiple temporary tables for contributing one task, my head was almost about to explode. But now I see the beauty of temporary tables. Although I would avoid using temporary tables if the query costs are too expensive, it explicitly forces us to make our code look more elegant because we have much more ease on looking at it without the nested queries garbled around it and the level of indentations that we have to separate one query from the other. Given that temporary tables also run isolated instead all at once as with subqueries, it is much easier for me to do unit testing for complicated tasks (which part of the query creates my garbage data?).

### But Most Important Of All, It Does Not Discuss Much About Relational Theory.

Would I give anyone complete access if they knew the above tutorial? No, unfortunately not in my case. I find that in most practical use cases, people will not run all the queries in one table, but in multiple tables. The dread of people joining with the wrong columns or the wrong order by letting the SQL optimize their concatenated list of tables that are delimited with a comma that they learned from an outdated non-practical computer science course (Iterating again that the trade-offs of hardware optimization are second to none to users being able to maintain their queries). Even when the terms of use where laid in bold before giving access and after several warnings, it still amazes me that many users are not even still fascinated that when their query takes longer than 2 minutes and it is their first try that they should terminate it and instead try with a smaller data set (that is one of the main reasons why a database administrator decides to put time limits to queries with more stricter ones to the roles that have less grasp on databases). If people did not play Russian Roulette on databases and instead understood relational theory by:

* Explicitly use INNER, LEFT, FULL OUTER join with preference of using columns that take less size (i.e. integers are better than varchar(500))
* To understand that joins can either amplify their number of records, keeps them the same, or become a subset. 
* Understand the use of nulls properly within scalar functions (i.e. nulls are not counted) and left joins (does it become a 1 to 0 relationship? Then that table we join will be null) and to make sure to convert columns that contain nulls before they are joined with other tables (Read [SQL And Relational Theory by C.J. Date](https://www.amazon.com/SQL-Relational-Theory-Write-Accurate/dp/1491941170/) to see the twists it will entail).

Give them those three lessons and if they follow I will give them full access to any database with joy (maybe let them even do a part of my work for making them a favor or two).

### Summary: From The Cover, Examples Do Not Provide Elegant Use Cases Of SQL, Such As Window Functions And Temporary Tables. No Highlights Of Relational Theory Makes It Not An Easy Buy-In To The Full Course, Especially When Targeted For Users Seeking Core SQL Intermediate Skills  

Window functions and temporary tables may be more resource intensive, but we all know that the rate of a programmer per hour is more expensive than the rate of a hardware running per hour. I am more like a Googler, and if I had to choose between the two, I would pick the one that makes my day easier for maintaining the code.

In summary, this is a great complimentary tutorial for intermediate SQL users, but in the real world, to relatively give those users more access, they need to have the foundations of relational theory within their hearts.
