**Original Article by [@fchollet](https://twitter.com/fchollet) can be found @medium:** https://medium.com/@francois.chollet/the-impossibility-of-intelligence-explosion-5be4a9eda6ec

### The Fear And Pride Of Embracing Intelligence

I think to each, the definition of intelligence is different. Some treat it as a final destination (hence termed “superior”) while others as a journey. A journey requires an environment to grow itself while a destination is a pre-determined algorithm. Once an entity ceases to stop in growing itself from the environment, it stops being intelligent, as any entity can reach further to its intelligence at some point.

When discussing intelligence, we discuss entities who can use the most of the capacity of their allocated time on understanding and improve the inputs of our environment instead of spinning them around, as well how can we be good actors in terms for all collectively contribute on that same common goal in harmony.

Intelligence is all about efficiency and pace. It is a soccer match where the best team that fairs best on the above attributes wins. The coach that finds the formula on training their teams best (the closest we have now is the scientific method) will have the advantage.

I do understand that people who use these words (hi, Elon Musk!) may mislead people to the wrong conclusions by keeping our society in a stall state. If for instance, we lived in a different world where we treated science to this day as a witchcraft due to its ability on destroying the world with weapons of mass destruction like nuclear bombs, we would have ceased to grow to our intelligence because society as a norm embraced to suppress information in the situations that it could lead to bad outcomes. However, I think the mentality where bad outcomes can happen is still important. The role of a Data Scientist should not be like the traditional scientist that dismissed something and later on regretted later for not paying too much attention to it (Remember Einstein?). On the other hand, I can feel the empathy for the amount of bad humor you go over with articles believing that Facebook created bots that can talk in secret language. I know its bad humor because this will keep your career in a jam like how the old scientists were treated as doing witchcraft in the medieval times.

Here is the important question: Some people like Elon Musk have a cause. They want to protect society from disaster at all costs. However, sometimes, saying the truth does not always work. Think about it. Most people usually tend to cling to something that they can comprehend. Evil robots thwarting the town is easy to comprehend. Make it more complicated than a five year cannot comprehend, they will ignore it and will not support your cause. On the other hand, I do understand how much these perceptions harm the data science community.

I think instead of bashing the fake news of others, we need to promote genuine ways on allowing people to express the possible adverse outcomes that can happen on our next step our civilization will take so we don’t land on a slippery slope and go back to square one. We should say “AI can go bad with ‘this’ and not by ‘this’” instead of “Do not express how AI can go bad at all”. The problem is not the pessimists, but the pessimists using wrong arguments. In order to fix the pessimists, we do not remove them, but we replace their pessimists’ arguments with more genuine ones. Pessimists always exist. If you cannot handle pessimists, either ignore them or train them properly. I prefer the latter. They are very useful in many cases. Remember, sometimes, pessimists white lie in order to fill their agenda at all costs.
