**Original Article can be found @yanirseroussi:** https://yanirseroussi.com/2016/03/20/the-rise-of-greedy-robots/

**Mindset growth shift: From war, to greedy, to evaluation.**

Yes, the world has always been greedy. This reminds me of Dijkstra greedy algorithm which is used to find the shortest route. There is a lot of “steps” for an organization to become profitable. Greediness tries to find the most cost-efficient way to achieve the goal of being profitable. Let us assume that each road is a railway and trains traverse to their destinations. Each decision path will sacrifice other trains waiting to cross to their destination. If human stupidity does not overrule again, our scarce resource ultimately will be constrained by economics to one element only: time. Where do we want humans to allocate spending their time on?

Greediness will always thrive in the sense it is seen as a trait of growth by society. War, which in today’s society we ultimately condemn, was viewed in the past as one way for one nation to gain growth. Growth was limited to the domain of a specific country and the rest treated as an enemy. The end of the war was enforced by the right of not interfering other one’s own property. People had to find other means to gain growth. Thus, the concept of greediness was enforced. Greediness is using emotional appeal to manipulate other’s people habits to a specific domain.

The problem with greediness is whether people evaluate the emotional appeal matching to something positive or not positive to self and society. The maximum capacity of getting that right is:

* The effort of people on having a multi-disciplinary knowledge of multiple domains
* The effort of people of using their knowledge to their daily decisions.

Most consumers are passive on the above two points due to society constraints. More specifically, if people focus learning from other domains, they have the risk of underperforming on their main domain having a competitive disadvantage on their prospect of their career. This limited domain in bayesian terms makes people have low confidence for many topics leaving others to influence our decision making. I think that low confidence is the main causation we see a high rise trend where people’s decisions rely more upon push messages instead of pull messages. I haven’t seen to this day sophisticated push messages where the user has a choice of options what to see except in the on boarding phase of a product. In addition, the on boarding phase are only reasons why you should use me. There will never be a phase on reasons when not to use me. If a specific domain of a product could say to the user based on the personalized information it gathered: “Hey, you shouldn’t be using me in this situation. Use Bob instead, it will make your life easier” (This will be possible with the evolution of data). The problem is a specific domain will never explain alternative domains that can solve a user’s individual problem better because there is not a commission fee of recommending one user to another domain with qualitative information. This causes a domain which consists a set of employees to not have an interest in researching alternative domains that can solve a specific problem better because the current system has not placed a platform to reward it with a commission fee. Instead, the only way for a specific domain to thrive is by copying others ideas or owning them through acquisitions. This demotivates innovation in great sum. So far, it is only people with consciousness, with value or no value, such as start-up entrepreneurs that leave old positions and people who contribute in open source correspondingly, that go the extra mile to innovate. My whole hypothesis is that our natural instincts are a machine learner, and our only task is to do progress on everything, even our own personal life.

If those two points happen, the rule of greediness will be overruled. People will consciously evaluate whether that emotional appeal makes sense in the big picture because their jobs will force them to associate their domain with alternatives to gain a commission fee. That will gain them a more robust interdisciplinary domain knowledge causing them to have more confidence on pulling than pushing information of other domains they start to know about. Passive consumers will be less passive. The value was based before by war, now greediness, later it will be all about evaluation.

Your point of people doing less work emphasizes a more passive society than it already is. I do not propose that as that will make our situation worse. The problem is the type of tasks people do, not the task itself. People need to do tasks that progress our society instead of being passive like the game of civilization. It is the only way that makes us happy and has a purpose. Like we humans create machine learning instances have an end goal purpose, so we as humans are machine learners for a purpose where we can handle any situation that becomes a problem. Our starter pack was human suffering, hunger, and death to solve problems. Now it becomes less so and we have to be motivated by it beyond extrinsic rewards.
