What about you try this: Go talk to one of your smartest friends and make a conversation about a difficult topic. Now go read this same topic throughout a book. Which of the two gave us the most background knowledge about the topic? Chances are that although our friend's highlights about a topic may influence us on being more open to an idea, a book is second to none on convincing all our uncertainties and doubts we have about a certain topic. The difference between a casual conversation and reading a book is the amount of time spent beforehand on a certain topic.

Let me tell you one thing for sure: To this day, books are still the best way of articulating an idea that is based on our own experiences and findings. A good book on average can take from months to years before it gets published. Authors of well-known books improvise their writing many times to make sure the main message is convincing and easy to read. Although books are not the best way to get in personal touch with the author's mindset, books try to cover every nook and cranny about their arguments. Unlike a well-presented speech presentation, books do not have a Q&A session at the end where they can respond to counter arguments from the audience. Unlike online articles that discuss a topic on a specific angle, a book tries to revolve around an idea through different angles with chapters. Given a book's chapter can take longer space than an article, they can provide a narrative arc that is more compelling and contains more depth about a certain topic from your average online article. But most important of all, the spectrum of different story arcs about a certain topic through the chapters of the book gives us a more a broader wide angle about the main message of the book. Although these books can be later reproduced as a series of movies or documentaries, we can be certain that it will not have the same enriching experience as reading a book. Although the content of the message in movies may be more accessible, you cannot reproduce the number of days and weeks readers ponder over through certain passages of a book.

**Books, in general, are idea generators. Out of the many mediums of expressing an idea, books are the best in quality on expressing an idea thoroughly.**

So now let me ask you your above question in a different angle: If books are considered the best idea generators, then will idea generators change one's life? It does. Have you seen the movie Inception? In the movie Inception, the main actors go inside a person's dream to influence their beliefs subconsciously. Idea generators, on the other hand, influence our beliefs consciously. Idea generators, in contrast, know that we may not buy-in to their story immediately and they have to go on many terms on selling their idea.

I think a big reason books sometimes are not easy to read is not for their confusing storyline, but when we come to the undeniable truth that we have to discard some of our own ideas and replace them with the ideas the author instead provides. **If music changes your mood, a book changes your mindset.** Can you imagine when someone stands up for something that does not derive from his family upbringing, but from something he read from a book? Books are so convincing that it inspires us to think differently from our current circumstances that we would not be able to explore without their storytelling. It shapes us and forms us like editing the source code of a software. Books give us new questions to ask to ourselves we would never ask before, redefining our whole purpose. Although it is the people that we choose to be close with and work with that embraces our own future, reading a book can become a cornerstone life event on traversing new paths that we never explored before.
