## 2017-11-26: Q&A SESSION ON NEXT EDUCATIONAL SELF IMPROVEMENT GAME

**Hi. I know that you are implying on creating an educational fan based logic adventure game. Can you tell us a few details about it?**

I am the creator of [Improve Your Personal Mental Map](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/selfdevboostermentalmaptour/README.md) - A twelve-week course that teaches you important personal development concepts that I learned through books over the last three years. I've found those concepts so important that I did not want them to only end up as an academic journal, but to as well people being able to contemplate these findings and have some context of how these concepts can unfold. After too much contemplation, I decided to give it a try on narrating these concepts within an educational fan based logic adventure game.

**You are creating a game in order for your main message within your personal development course have more meaning and visibility. Can you tell us why it is an educational fan based logic adventure game in the first place? Can you provide us more details about it?**

My goal is to transition people into better models of society by narrating a story. How else can this be illustrated better in going through this challenge other than a story? Imagine a person feeling empty and then he goes over some events and realizes that "Hey, life is very interesting!" and figures out later on that "I can only keep it interesting as long as I am constantly a better model to our society". You may or may not agree that this is the issue. But that is the proposition I will be influencing you along the way. I will try to make you believe. I will have to follow through all those touch points where I can interact with you and poke the right buttons to make you change your mind. In order for the story to be interactive, I have to allow the player to make choices. The element of story and choice, I do not find them anywhere else better than in a game.

But there are many forms of games, such as text game, 3D game, or two-dimensional adventure game. I did not want it to be so vivid like a 3D game where the focus is on how awesome 3D is or a text game where it is very dry and lacks details with no pictures, sound, and music. If you like reading plain text, you can read my personal development course [Improve Your Personal Mental Map](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/selfdevboostermentalmaptour/README.md) instead. But if I want to influence you, I really need to make the message more concrete with specific detail examples so you can have a grasp of what it means. Because if I cannot reach you on my course, I can at least reach you in my two-dimensional adventure game. 

But think about it. I do not want to make it only a visual novel where you "tap, tap, tap" the text and you cannot differentiate whether you are watching a movie. I do want people to accept my specific ideas, but I also want to give them open-ended questions where they can contemplate and think out their own solution, their own context of how we can transition people into better models of society because I believe that others can come up definitely with better answers to my own because they have some specific individual experiences that I do not have. That is what makes each individual very unique. So for that reason, I decided that it cannot only be an adventure game but a logic adventure game where people have to use their wits and their brains. I will give them riddles and metaphors which they have to untangle so they can better understand the story. As you know, all logic games do not give you the answer directly, you have to figure it out by yourself, they are even more challenging than simple adventure games. There is a reason why metaphors are used in our day to day life. Because If I present to you the message directly within the game, then it becomes pointless as it can already be found directly through my course [Improve Your Personal Mental Map](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/selfdevboostermentalmaptour/README.md). Because that course cannot challenge you enough to really understand its concepts, I will instead give it to you as a riddle so you can use your own mind so you can paraphrase it on your own words in order to be able to unlock the message in your mind. Otherwise, like a professor in my statistics class has said, "Life will not be like a cheat sheet where they give you the key to unlocking a door. You have to figure it out by yourself, by looking at the set of keys that I give you and using your intuition to figure out which key should be the right fit to open the door".

I make the game fan-based so people are more familiar with the characters so they will be able to not focus so much what the characters are, but what are the characters up to. I want them to focus more on the message. I want them to be challenged by the characters actions and not for what they already are. 

As to why it is educational? My whole life is about the idea: Why should we not have a [Grand Invention Auto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tesla,_Inc.) instead of [Grand Theft Auto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Theft_Auto)? As you know from [Immanuel Kant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immanuel_Kant), theft does not work in the real world if it was a universal theory, but invention, it does. Why we want the easy way when there is another maybe not so easy but still a joyful way of spending our life while adding value to our society? Why can we not simulate that instead of imagining something that cannot be possible in our real life?

**Can you give us a few details on what made you in creating this game and what do you mean when you say "transition people into better models of society"? Can you give us more details for what the gamer that wants to play your game, what he is about to go through?**

There is a difference between knowing the path and following the path. [In my last video of my personal development course](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sw2wAMMIKkg), I discussed one element that it missed and it cannot discuss: Righteousness. As much as you know, I cannot teach you how to follow a path, it is all up to us. But I can give you an important hint: When you start to believe in your path, you will do the next step, which will not be doing, but planning. The key word in our life is not time, thinking, doing, it is all about planning. All the political and economic problems we have is: Who does the planning for us? How we do the planning? What we do when our plan fails? Its all about planning. Its the one where if we don't do it, we go straight to an intellectual paralysis. So if you want to teach one element to your kids or to anybody else who wants to develop and grow, I will not discuss them to be good communicators or be workaholic. No. Planning. Because if they can plan, everything else can follow through. And that is what this course is all about: To prepare you for the planning of being better models to society. But I cannot be a role model example yet to others that I am genuine of following that path that I preached to you. For me, in order to do that, I have to provide a plan for me and you. To me, I will have to give you examples of how that plan will be and I find no better commitment to myself than to represent this plan throughout a game. By providing illustrative descriptive examples of how our world will be is like writing a novel science fiction book. That future can be done in the next day if someone wants to create a startup about it or the next 100 years if we have a lot of bottlenecks, such as [the technology tree in the Civilization game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology_tree) where you need to go to a lot of steps before you are able to reach to that specific trait you want your civilization to have. To my audience, I give you open-ended questions where you can think about it and start your own journey. After I finish creating this game, I hope I can attempt on creating some of my visions from the game into reality. But until then, I cannot do anything about it until I plan first to the point where I control the future instead of the future controlling me.

The concept of making humans better models to our society can figuratively be approached in many different sets of ways and I gave my approach not from my individual experience but from what I learned from different personal development leaders that have written books and practiced these stuff through seminars and coaching. But I I feel that is not enough and I want these concepts to be a part of the fabric of our society like how we wear clothes, to be wide and spread, like how we take photos and share them on our social media platforms, to be such a common practice. 

It is very challenging to give you details about how these concepts will be illustrated in the story of the game. To be a better role model in our society, there is not a one set of concepts that you need to learn, there are several sets of concepts that you need to learn in life. It is not straightforward as it is, but I can tell you one thing for sure: We can all do planning. That is for sure. Planning is like driving a car that gives you the choice of what destination you want to go. I find that planning is the engine from moving from one location to another. Not all people drive these days. Most people build and service the car and I want instead for those people to drive the car as well. So in this course and in my upcoming game, I give you the choice not to drive Grand Theft Auto but to do Grand Invention Auto (also defined as [Successful Critical Thinking & Ideal Critical Thinking throughout my course](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/selfdevboostermentalmaptour/week_10.md#practical-contributor-thought-before-now-after)). In order to be able to do that, we have to look at the details on how we construct our own generalities, our own assertions, our own hypothesis. They all point to two choices: When we generate our speculations, do we use logic or do we disable our logic? Do we accept the new input that we get that changes our theory under new circumstances? Do we accept those new anomalies and exceptions we did not include before? Or do we just ignore them and spin them around with our own imagination? Because the choice that we choose between those two is whether we will become a person that can be universally constant happy by inventing things or universally constant depressed using their imagination on stuff that cannot happen in reality like theft or any other word that you want to replace with theft and use the [Categorical Imperative by philosopher Immanuel Kant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Categorical_imperative).

**Can you tell us a few details what this fan game is based off?**

The fan base game is [Phoenix Wright](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenix_Wright:_Ace_Attorney). In fact, I created a fan based game of Phoenix Wright more than ten years ago as a teenager. You see, I was a big fan of this game so much that I wanted to create a game out of it. I was so much out of my mind that I even included it as a part of one of my assignment in one of my business communication class. The professor just put a note of "Thanks! But no, I will not open my disc tray and put your CD-ROM to play your game." But he was kind of "Thank you for your effort". Regardless, I posted that fan-based game in Newgrounds which I later removed it because I felt embarrassed by the story not being concise. I focused at that time only on the technicalities, on the features, on replicating the game inside a flash-based system with ActionScript and keyframes and other keywords you may not know or will never know given that [flash is already deprecated](https://blogs.adobe.com/conversations/2017/07/adobe-flash-update.html). Although my first try was a failure, I am going to create a fan-based Phoenix Wright game again. And this second chance is an opportunity for me to show its true colors of what this game is all about.

The original game is about proving innocent victims that they are not guilty of their crimes. However, prosecutors will speculate based on their witnesses and evidence that they are the true actors of the event. We have to figure out from the evidence and testimony the plot holes in order to figure out the big picture of what has actually happened instead of what was being presented based on the speculations of the prosecutor. There is no other game I think that tests your wits of your mind as this one. It is a perfect candidate game to envision the challenge of transitioning humans into better models to our society. With the spectacular art the designers put effort and the composers which I listen to their soundtracks every day, it is my second chance on giving them my true colors for fitting content that will flourish the spectrum of educating you on something where you can be a better person. As one of my professors that specializes on websites has said, "It is not about the features of a website where everyone can clone them that matters. It is about the content the website has that really matters."

**Thank you for your time. Any last words before we end this Q&A session?**

There is a difference between steering the wheels for adding value to society and being the mechanic behind the engine, from building structures with solid foundations versus ones that you have to relentlessly keep them running afloat. Join me as I go venture you to a science fiction story that can become one day a reality where we transition into better human models through our society while leaving the same choices open-ended to the player so they can provide a better answer to that challenge due to their individual experiences. Join Phoenix Wright into a world that is changing to a one that is better,  requiring us to be more socially responsible citizens than we are today. Are we up to the challenge of bringing order or be passive to the chaos? It is a great time to discuss these topics as [China moves in the next years to compulsory rate its citizens](http://www.wired.co.uk/article/chinese-government-social-credit-score-privacy-invasion), which means, if we don’t start planning ourselves, then others will do the planning for us, and it will be kept like that, until we realise that it is better to do our work by planning it our self instead letting others do our work for us by giving them the carrot and the stick. 

I leave the duty to the gamer accepting his disbelief at start hoping by the end of the game I have an open-minded individual that not only changes his mindset but grasps that there is a lot of work to do to make our society better, making them perfect candidates to that potential once they start to believe they can contribute. Follow my twitter account [softdevlife](https://twitter.com/SoftDevLife) for the latest news about the game and get a taste what this game is all about by diving through my free personal development course [Improve Your Personal Mental Map](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/selfdevboostermentalmaptour/README.md).
