**In our previous Q&A session, we discussed of what type of game you will be creating. Given that you wanted your audience to be in a comfortable setting on discussing the challenging topic of transitioning to better human models in our society, you decided the game will be fan based. Out of all, it seems Phoenix Wright as a fan base fits to the criteria of the type of game you are creating because it uses logic not only to be able to interact with the player to your main message, but to also enable them to embrace logic to their day to day life so they can make better decisions. We know that you had previous exposure to said game through your childhood. How were you able to say to yourself, "This is the game! There is no question about it!". Where there a moment that you had to reconsider other fan base games as an option?**

I think the Phoenix Wright gameplay in general already attracts the right type of audience to my game. Since fans who have played the game had to evaluate their surroundings in order to bring innocent victims to justice, it is most likely they are more open-minded when they hear a certain point of view in the news. In today's society, most people may not use logic to evaluate the input of others because they either have a friend they just trust or they want to have some meaning in their life by being a member of a big group. It is not that "we should not do choices", but "how do we do those choices". Do we prioritize our choices by how others will look at us or can we evaluate our previous choices we made even against the adversity of others? Fans of the game are already familiar with how prosecutors sugar coat a story to the point it becomes indisputable that there is any gap within the statements that it could fall apart. But time and time over again, after several cross-examinations with a witness testimony while observing the same evidence from different angles can uncover the true colors of the mystery. I do not think I can convert people who hold certain opinions that they never tried to self doubt themselves. Therefore, I have more chance in here than any other game I have seen so far to persuade the message of transforming people into better models of society.

Another reason is the setting of the environment. You work as a lawyer for defending your clients accusations. I really loved the Business Law I learned from my University. I feel that Business Law has greater value than contemplating ethics in a philosophy class. It is the difference between playing a thing over your head and placing that idea into the real world. The latter is more challenging because you have to be rational and think of all the use cases for the law to appropriately fit within the actions of an individual.

Besides the setting, the main characters stand out. I think they fit well to my message. First, they want justice to prevail. I do prefer a world that visions a utopia because what can a gloomy vision do to us other than stall us in progressing ourselves as a society? It will be a [halo effect and a self-fulfilling prophecy](https://sociologytwynham.com/2008/12/27/stereotyping-halo-effect-labelling-and-the-self-fulfilling-prophecy/). In addition, when they interrogate a person through cross-examinations, we have witnesses that stand out so much that is hard to not be influenced by their looks, yet the game consistently keeps us on looking at the events objectively by pressing for more info and contradicting witness statements in order to keep us away from judging things from the cover of the book. Unlike most daily jobs these days that focus on the hard sciences of our physical world, this game focuses on the soft sciences of how people behave irrationally by spinning their stories around until at some point it does not work to their own end. Characters that look forward to a positive future while experienced at depth on facing the human side of things in their daily careers at law makes it a great game candidate on providing exemplars of transitioning humans into better models to our society.

**You discuss that the game has a human side with a positive future. Will your new game fall to the same conclusions too?**

Yes, that is correct. Unlike the original, the fan based game will be more serious and illustrate topics that have been not demonstrated to the public to this day. Think for instance of "fake news". Fake news is a topic about how people can be manipulated on believing that a fact is genuine by relying all sources as trustworthy. But even people that we have high standards to this day can actually not bring genuine news at all. Think for instance of [the scientists that did not do their research properly](https://medium.com/the-spike/how-a-happy-moment-for-neuroscience-is-a-sad-moment-for-science-c4ba00336e9c). The reason we have fake news is due to our overreliance that other people will do the best effort on providing an accurate representation of the events. But as you all know from the Phoenix Wright game, even under best circumstances, that is not possible, as after all, every testimony needs an extra pair of eyes to look things at a better angle. And those pair of eyes cannot be someone within our group or people we trust because as we discussed before, they do not want to be looked out by others as the big bad guy in the room badmouthing others. In other words, we need a person who is not affiliated with the domain of others while at the same time courageous on expressing the flaws of others. Wikipedia is the best deliverable we have to this day that demonstrates that by allowing several people with different backgrounds on debating and revising previous commits for each topic in order to make those articles as genuine as possible. With Co-founder of Wikipedia introducing Wikitribune (News presented in a similar format as Wikipedia), there is pressure for news outlets to be a better role model to the public. Fake news was a topic that I thought of a lot before fake news ever became popular. And to this day, I still think we have a lot more work to do on addressing fake news properly. Not only from the news outlets, but also on retraining ourselves. I think we are not very well educated on evaluating articles properly not only because [we don't think critically](https://www.irishtimes.com/news/education/lack-of-critical-thinking-in-schools-and-society-a-concern-higgins-1.3294815), but because [we lack a broad knowledge of our surroundings](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/25/opinion/sunday/how-to-get-your-mind-to-read.html), as well our emotional intelligence being very low that allows our self-bias to slip in. 

So imagine I provide you issues similar to fake news in the game. Imagine that you live in a society where the solution to addressing fake news have already been resolved in our society and you would only be unfamiliar to it if you lived under a rock. I will demonstrate these elements of being human in a positive way. I do not think current dramas like [Black Mirror](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Mirror) help much by focusing only on the negative outcomes of our future. It keep us in a stall state. [It makes people apprehensive to the current research data science brings to the table](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/comments/the_fear_and_pride_of_embracing_intelligence.md). In contrast, if I bring you a solution that is not out in the world yet, but seems practical and doable, I may be influencing several people and investors from my game to create and fund the next startup that makes our society better. 

I did not want to end up with only an academic journal on how to improve yourself and where others will eventually dismiss it and not apply it in their life. I neither want to create a product where people only care whether it made sales or not. I want to instead bring a mission: To make humans better models to our society. That no matter the change of times come along the way, that mission will still be relevant. I want to be remembered mostly for that. 

**Do you find the mission of making humans better models to our society important?**

Yes. The problem in today's society is that we focus too much on the physical side of things instead of the human side of things. Nevertheless, I do love people who embrace a mission to the fullest like Elon Musk. [I even made a short tribute page showcasing his electric cars and reusable rockets](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/notes/elon_musk_tribute.md). I think we all are influenced by fictional heroes and science fiction worlds within our childhood. Otherwise, we would never make science fiction a reality. The problem is that companies these days focus too much on the physical side of things instead of the human side of things. As our population grows and our lifestyle demands increase over the years, there is no doubt that improving the physical world is essential. However, I think we need to adjust our views that optimizing and improving the human side of things is also essential. Once upon a time, our ancestors looked at the physical world as a construct where the forces of nature were incomprehensible and beyond our control. Today, we can channel the forces of nature to our needs, to lifestyles where we never could imagine before. Similarly, I hope instead of people letting the environment influence their behavior to instead allow our behavior set the standards for what our future environment will be. We should not defend ourselves that our main focus should only be on improving our physical world. It is like we follow the same mindset our past ancestors did by focusing only on hunting and gathering. Eventually, someone will not choose to escape on that reality by instead opening the doors for the many ways we can improve the human side of our society. This is the main vision of what my fan based game will provide. It is a game where a young Elon Musk will look at it and say "Oh, look at this! Those heroes are going into a quest for solving the puzzle of the human side! Oh boy, I want to join them when I grow up!". I am not sure what is the exact equivalent of spacecraft, electric cars on the human side, but this is what I try to vision my game will look to the youth and young graduates that will play the game. If otherwise, I made this game in the same format as the original Phoenix Wright games already are, I would feel I have been wasting my time. 

**Last question of the day: What was your favorite turnabout out of all in the Phoenix Wright Series?**

Out of all, I think the [DL-6 Incident](http://aceattorney.wikia.com/wiki/DL-6_Incident) in Turnabout Goodbyes still stands out from the rest. Edgeworth did not follow his legacy of his father. Instead, as a small child, he followed on the steps of prosecutor Von Karma. Similarly, we all, in general, are small children that follow the path others provide us instead of following the path of our father. Eventually, Edgeworth later finds out that following the steps of others was full of regret. Although Von Karma had a white sheet record where he never lost a case, it sounded too good to be true. In order for him to keep that winning streak, he had to cover a lot of stuff. Similarly, in today's world, we cover the human side of things and pretend that improving the physical world is all that matters. Instead, we should start envisioning the human side so we can reprioritize on tasks that will make the most impact to our society. Otherwise, we will be biting the bullet, and one day, it will all haunt us back. Last but not least, Edgeworth was not able to resolve the DL-6 incident on his own. It was his friend Phoenix Wright that was able to shake him out from the shackles of the past. Similarly, I hope my fan based game will be able to unwind our past and allow us to move forward to new territories.
