General Answer: **Non-fiction self-improvement books.**

If you read a lot of non-fiction self-improvement books, there is a high chance you will find something enlightening that you never did know before.

Most likely, a lot of the books you learned in school do not follow under that category. Education focuses a lot on giving us a foundation on how to be able to accommodate our "basic needs" with a specific technical field of our choice in our society. Working on the ideas generated by others through our workplace are great to understand the perspective of others while generating an income so you can accommodate your financial and psychological needs.

However, if at some point you want to lead and traverse your own paths instead of following others, you need to learn how to be a morally ethical good being with the rest of the members of our community in order to bring your leadership with harmony. That is when non-fiction self-improvement books come into play.

Specific Answer: **Black Box Thinking By Matthew Syed**

After reading several non-fiction books, there are some that I found whose messages are so important, yet are very hard to share those messages well across. But I did find some books that share a very important message which is easy to recommend for others to read. Of all the books I have read so far, I recommend the book Black Box Thinking by Matthew Syed.

Here are the following main reasons why this book becomes one of my top lists for recommending it to others:

**1. It teaches you how to evaluate things properly**

* How we get fixated on our own generalizations from first impressions can keep us and the rest out from looking things at a better angle.
* How doing tests without proper benchmarks (A/B testing and others) can reach us to the wrong conclusions.
* How blaming people about a problem creates an environment full of fear and secrecy, making future incidents harder to identify and resolve.
* How detrimental it is when expectations of our duties are at a high bar, forcing us to cover most of the mistakes in order to keep our job or reputation.
* Having an open feedback loop to our mistakes (growth mindset) helps us to be able to get closer to the right conclusion than being in denial (fixed mindset).

**2. It teaches you the many ways you can add value to society**

* How we get better results by trying our same ideas a lot of times instead of a few times.
* A lot of the improvements are done marginally by improving processes within the existing rules of the game.
* Innovation requires specific context about a personal problem experienced and requires you to assemble a different set of domain blocks through new perspectives.

You will find out how minor improvements for a bicycle team shifted them to become the top performers and how Dyson innovated the revolutionary vacuum cleaners after a personal problem he experienced with his traditional vacuum cleaner and how diligent he persisted on finding a solution through trial and error.

You will find out how the aviation industry changed its thinking process to a one that had a lot of fatalities to becoming one of the safest modes of transportation. You will also find out why there is a lot of work for hospitals on improving their processes, making medical errors as the third leading cause of death.

In my opinion, this is a great all-in-one book to get started on having better perspectives when you evaluate the current problems we have in today's society and the different ways you can add value to them.
