After getting a proper education and relevant work experience, I started to doubt myself whether the beliefs I stood could hold ground. That lack of confidence pushed me more to be silent to my opinions. I had a tingling feeling that being passive all the time to my opinions was not my best option for all situations.

So I started to blog at 2014. **The blog in the first place was to keep a diary of my personal beliefs and analyze any events of my past experiences.** I then tried to self-reflect on the content within my blog posts I wrote for the first months and found out that I was very quite obsessed on how to optimize human behavior to cater better to our self and others.

However, I found that the way I articulated my opinions were limited to my own personal experiences. I wanted to find out if similar definitions of my own opinions about human behavior existed and whether I missed anything or didn't clearly understood as much as I hoped to for the whole human puzzle of human behavior. **Consequently, I decided to turn my blog 180 degrees by analyzing and resonating insights of human behavior from a dozen of self-improvement books.** I picked a variety type of books. Some of the books I chose:

* **Popular & Recent:** That they could be found at any bookstore.
* **Not Recent:** But enough popular that I could be able to buy them in the market store at a bargain price.
* **Not Popular:** But recently curated and displayed on the front aisles of the libraries I frequently visited.

On my journey on reading self-improvement books, one book dared my heart to go so far as to go beyond taking notes and posting it on my blog to creating a PowerPoint presentation and do a speech about the topics involved within a personal development club. That unconscious action demonstrated that I really cared about sharing the topics I learned from others.

After reading several books, I knew that my notes within my blog for the books I read was not in the best format and the topics and definitions discussed to be fully comprehensible. For that reason, I created a personal development portfolio of all the books I have read and named it selfdevboostermentalmaptour. Yes, the name is long and awkward, but at least the name resonated that it cared about human behavior and wanted the possibility for anyone to be able to improve it. Besides sharing my insights with others through my personal development portfolio, it was also a test to myself whether I knew my material that I learned from others well.

After learning about the many ways humans can be better models to society, it was like me being a kid all over again learning a new theory and every time that an issue came in front of me, I wanted to apply the theory I just learned. Before I started writing my blog, I was mostly spoon fed and tried to enjoy life as much as possible. After I finished writing my personal development portfolio, I had so many ideas about the current problems we have at hand in our current society, I did not know where to start and whether I was wasting my time by re-inventing the wheel. **So I started to read and review books on what we have achieved so far and what we have not achieved so far yet in our society and how we can take part on the left part that needs to be completed within our world.**

For more than three years, writing my blog was like a non-profit business for others to know about me and to know better myself. A lot of hours per day was spent on reading the books, thinking about them, analyzing them, articulating them through writing and speaking about them. Worst of all, I got only single digit views from each post I wrote. Was writing a blog through that way worth it? It definitely was! The only regret was that I did not start it earlier. The earlier you start working on yourself (i.e. blogging) than to others (i.e. office work), the more you will have a clear direction where you have to head next. So next time, don't only paddle the boat of others, start a trip with your own boat, clear the dust of your own compass and explore and figure the undiscovered map of the world. You will definitely find something interesting, riddles others won't be able to figure out, unearthing the lost treasure you personally were always looking for.
