# How to master the basics of Data Engineering

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*7BqD_cUuOXgzVLs4.jpeg)

#### CONTENTS

1.  **INTRODUCTION**
2.  **PREFACE: EDUCATION**
3.  **CHAPTER 1: DATA EXPLORATION**
4.  **CHAPTER 2: DATA PIPELINES**
5.  **CHAPTER 3: MONITORING TOOLS**
6.  **CHAPTER 4: PRODUCTIVITY TOOLS**
7.  **CHAPTER 5: AUTOMATION & INNOVATION**
8.  **CHAPTER 6: COMMUNICATION**
9.  **CHAPTER 7: SKILLS**
10.  **CHAPTER 8: MOTIVATION**
11.  **CONCLUSION**

### **INTRODUCTION**

I have been very fortunate in working with data. The next week after I finished
my last exams on my computer Information Systems degree that I received with
honors, I landed a job to flourish my software development skills that I learned
in college by developing user interfaces so any user can create any report with
our software house that we provided to our clients. I still to this day do
various data related tasks in most of the bulk of my time and I think I have
gained enough wisdom to tell you the basics a data engineer has to go through
along his journey. Let us start then.

### PREFACE: EDUCATION

**Education is important, but remember, each track teaches you one side of the
coin, leaving the other side entirely up to you. What others tell you to learn
or you think you need to learn during your career is even more important than
what you learned before you graduated.**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*uYUadzYrtzEhQVlrueimYA.png)
<br>*Remember, like in every draft, you have to prove your own potential within your
college days, boot camps, and interviews. But that is just the first step of the
journey. The rest, you have to learn them as well within the time-frame of your
career.*

Taking courses related to your data career is very important and unlike my times
that were not plenty of options available in my college years on specializing on
some specific data skills, today there are a lot of college and universities
that provide degrees in data engineering and data analytics. Although at my time
there were several courses in my college that I could complete online or hybrid
(partially online and partially offline), we didn’t have access to various
certificates and data courses that you could complete on websites by just
registering with an e-mail account to gain more knowledge about your data needs.
Regardless, now that the term data has become more important than ever, you have
more opportunities in taking advantage of the available facilities provided
currently on boosting your knowledge on anything you want to do related with
data. Some things in the traditional education system have not changed much and
you still have two generic approaches to acquire a data career.

#### Practical Degrees

The first approach is to get a computer information systems degree from a
university like I did. The study of information systems has been there since the
inception of the first computers that took the space of a big hallway. Although
this major in the past used to be a study on how we process data into
information, it now has a more modern practical approach on giving you different
side business projects that you need to solve while at the same time learning
the ins and outs of a specific programming language. For instance, I had an
interesting project where I had to get various weather information from a
website which the user could search through them through several options on a
java application. Or take for instance in one of my last classes where I had to
create a C# application that allowed users to search through a dashboard the
various hotels available by various criteria and get a report out of it that was
made out of crystal reports. Don’t worry though. If you missed doing that as a
student, you can always catch up by doing side projects that you are interested
to explore on your free time. Besides that you learn a lot about marketing,
management, operations, economics, accounting, product development, statistics,
and business law and ethics in this major, we see that this major gives you a
head start in your career and enough common sense in finding creative ways on
applying your technical skills to the bottom line of the business organization
that you are working with, a feature that a computer science curriculum does not
provide. For me personally, my first projects that I did in my job did not felt
much of a challenge because they were similar to the ones I faced in college and
I rarely got lost on the big picture on how our software house was used by our
clients because I already knew all the general facets for how a business
operates, regardless of shape and form. However, if you did not traverse such
degree path, you can still gain the same knowledge these days by reading several
tech articles and magazines related to technology. Before the 2008 recession,
people were playing it safe with the current investments that still provided a
lot of high interest in return. Now that past investments have not shown to be
sustainable for the future, people are more open on investing in creative ideas
that have the potential to either make our economies more effective and
efficient, as well make our existing services more convenient. What you can
learn in a business course can now be learned by reading autobiographies of
success stories of startups and companies that are trying to reinvent
themselves.

#### Theoretical Degrees

The other approach to get a career in data is by getting a computer science
degree. Although a computer science degree will not give you straight visibility
that you are data literate after graduation, it does show that you have mastered
your craftsmanship of building solutions that are easy to maintain and can
scale. At my time, my business major and my first job were involved in using
Microsoft Windows as an operating system and using compiled languages like C#
and Java in graphical user interfaces. Although these tools deliver tangible
results, in terms of productivity, Linux and interpreted languages outperform
the work you can output for the same amount of time. Fret not if you did not
graduate as a computer scientist. I was able to learn Linux and interpreted
languages later throughout my career, but it took me at least one year to start
using them to their fullest potential. A computer science degree also teaches
you fundamental concepts of how programming languages operate as well. You will
have to know those concepts well and a lot of math in order to solve the
homework provided in your classes. Because how challenging the material of a
computer science degree is, from what I learned from my other colleagues that
used to study in this major is that you will not be able to get an easy grade
compared to other majors. On the other hand, a lot of my colleagues in my
information systems department did not get good grades either because a lot of
them were doing their courses while having a full time or part-time job. In a
computer science degree, it is very challenging to juggle yourself by doing two
things at once unless you can manage your time effectively while still being
psychologically happy with your life. Although a computer science degree does
not give you the basic intuition that you need to know while working in a
business organization, it gives you a heads up of all the interview questions
that you need to answer, as they most likely are computer science related,
especially from big multinational corporations. Furthermore, the foundations you
learned in a computer science degree will help you tremendously in the way you
approach solving business problems. I think a computer science degree changes
your perspective and your mindset on how you will be interacting with the tools
that you will be using in your daily work. If you didn’t venture this path,
there are many books that can teach you on the ways you can prepare ahead of a
technical interview, as well the opportunity to learn the basic foundations
within the trade of your skills so you can get all the nook and crannies of your
field. To me, that is the difference between a driver that drifts their car with
the shifts in automatic mode and the driver that surpasses them with the shifts
in manual mode. The former is just a professional while the latter is a real
expert in his field.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*hWKje8HcdQv9Rk9SX4Di7g.png)
<br>*Although practical degrees can get you ahead of the curve, theoretical degrees
provide foundations that come in handy when problems are more complicated or too
big to manage. Do get your hands dirty, but also learn a tip or two from those
who have mastered their craft.*

#### On advice and self-assessment

Whichever track you choose in your education, you will have to learn the other
side of the coin on your own. This is critically important. I see many people to
this day that are completely divided about this topic in many ways indirectly or
implicitly. This is not the correct approach in having a holistic approach for
touching all the basics of what a data engineer is involved around. You cannot
expect without doing enough side projects on a domain that you completely do not
know about that you will be able to develop successfully the most basic
requirements of a project under a tight deadline. You cannot expect on all
occasions that a drag and drop third-party program will become your salvation to
all of your perils. And no matter what others tell you, it is an embarrassment
if you deliver your specialties without having a deep care on how a general
business operates. It just shows that your career is motivated solely by the
technical specialties you learn instead of having an entrepreneurship mindset
where you are honestly passionate about a specific business domain or topic.

For instance, one colleague recommended me to read a book that teaches you a
more depth in look at the fundamentals of a relational database. Although I
learned how normalization works and the various ways you can join tables within
a database in my college years and was able to grasp those concepts more
concretely through my years of work experience, the book that I was advised to
read in depth was a game changer. It helped me to look at databases from a
completely different perspective than I used to before and starting on paying
attention to different things that I did not consider before. Furthermore, I was
lucky enough to meet and work with a team of developers that embraced on doing
all their programming in interpreted languages within a Linux environment
instead of doing all the bulk of their work through drag and drop, plug and
play. Although they never gave me direct advice, I noticed the trend from job
descriptions and blogs that Linux and interpreted languages were becoming an
important medium in most workplaces environments. Reading the situation, I
became proactive and initiative on dealing with most of my tasks with the use of
an interpreted language and all the command lines you can ever use within a
Linux environment.

When you get specific advice, make sure to not ignore it as it may help you
tremendously in the future of your career. If you get rejections of your work
with no feedback or the feedback provided is very vague, it is not constructive,
it seems such communication is more of a transaction instead of a deep caring
relationship for the progress of your career. You should always differ between
those two types of feedback you get either offline or online Q&A portals and
focus on finding conversations that can create long lasting relationships
instead of transactions either because their life is already fully booked or
they dislike something about you either because it is something very personal or
they are not in the mood or have the energy to just start arguing about it. Just
respect each individual own situation and there will always be an opportunity
for similar individuals on having the time to provide honest constructive
feedback as kindred spirits. In other situations, this opportunity is not always
available so you have to read the environment and be self-initiative and a
starter on learning skills that are guaranteed to be prevalent in the future.

### **CHAPTER 1: DATA EXPLORATION**

**Your job is how to sail the winds in the best way that avoids your ship in
getting the most damage instead of getting to your destination in the fastest
way possible.**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*EjuNM1fb4S5Vqet71aSK5w.png)
<br>*Remember, it is better for your crew to wait a little bit longer for arriving at
the treasure to avoid getting your boat shipwrecked.*

When I first started my career, I was fortunate enough to have ample time on
exploring ways I can navigate my best on getting the data that I need for my
deliverable without making any compromises for using the resources inefficiently
or making my source code later on harder to maintain. For many of you, you may
not have had the opportunity of starting to work on such environment. You may
instead have an impatient businessman that through their non-verbal expression
show their annoyance that goes through the mantra of their life as “if it works
with a duct tape, you don’t need to fix it”. The end result is those inefficient
queries that you wrote last year where working great until quite recently it has
stalled the entire system. They mistakenly thought that you know how to write
efficient queries and you have no choice due to the urgency to leave some senior
within your team handle the inefficient queries you wrote to be optimized.
Regardless of your situation, it is time to learn for not letting your crew
setting the direction of your ship and get the proper expertise on reading the
waves that will approach to your ship by reading weather patterns. Mastering
data exploration instead of getting the proper insights as fast as possible
should be the first important role for a captain that sails a data lake with a
container of their choice. Otherwise, you won’t be any different from the rest
of the crew. They may be the fellow crew pirates that can get digging gold for
you so you can have enough supply for the rest of your journey, but if they
don’t know how to get past the tides properly, they won’t last for long and that
is the last thing a captain will want to do for his crew. The basics of data
exploration a data engineer should know are:

* **SQL Keywords:** To know the order of execution of all the basic keywords of a
query and how to use them properly (SELECT, FROM, WHERE, GROUP BY, HAVING)
* **Aggregates, Data Types & Manipulation:** The ability to understand the data
types of each column, how to manipulate strings, the ability to use conditional
statements and how to aggregate data by picking the max, min, sum, average,
median and so on.
* **Joins:** The ability to know what the most proper joins against several
tables, that includes left join, right join, inner join, full outer join, union,
union all.
* **Null Values:** The ability to understand what NULL represents in a column and
the corresponding Boolean logic (true or false) when evaluating against null
values.
* **Cardinality:** Understanding how the records of a table are identified as
unique and the ability to know and ways to identify the join of two tables
whether they are a one to zero relationship, one to one relationship, and one to
many relationship.
* **Window Functions:** The ability to use window functions that involve
partitioning, sorting and ranking records (row_number, rank, dense_rank),
getting the values from previous or subsequent records (lag, lead), and the
ability to do cumulative sums (rows between unprecedented and current).
* **Advantages of each database:** To understand the advantages and disadvantages
of a relational and columnar database and how to use indexes and partition
columns correspondingly.

Although all of the above are easy to learn, they are very hard to master.
Courses that provide exercises and assignments can teach you fast the basics,
but more challenging topics for the same concepts can either get you lost or
have not grasped the topic completely. In a matter of fact, you may not face any
difficult challenges on your data explorations that you do within your side
projects and you will only encounter them on greater undertakings that involve
in the exploration of big volumes of data.

### **CHAPTER 2: DATA PIPELINES**

**Great boats are not bought from others. Great boats are built from scratch
that retains great bonds with the owner since the first days they get raised.**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*9fq--sZmzBSQaIgRJUd7Gg.png)
<br>*Creating a data pipeline requires you to learn different types of data
operations that each takes time to master. Setting the proper data models,
writing reusable general scripts and taking advantage of what each database
offers helps in making data pipelines more efficient.*

Running a ship from a great owner is great but building one from your own shows
you can take complete charge of the whole journeys on terrains that were never
explored before. Not all journeys can fit with the same ship the masters have
provided you with the keys, some paths are too narrow where only small thin
ships can traverse though while others require to be larger than the current you
have at your disposal due to the extreme winds and thunderstorms that you have
to cross through. It is fun to find ways on traversing effectively with the
wheels of your ship to different destinations, but it is even more fun to take
in charge what type of ships that you have to build ahead of your next journeys.
This expands the responsibilities that you have to take as a data engineer where
having a long-term strategy of the stuff that you are creating becomes more
important than ever before. Creating data pipelines include the following:

* **Config:** The ability to set up and configure the appropriate packages on your
computer instances.
* **Data Operations:** The ability to do various data operations, such as
download, import, export across databases, data lakes, local instances and FTP
servers.
* **Database Model:** The ability to optimize existing pipelines by using the
right data models, such as storing your historical data more efficiently (SCD
Type II) and effectively (by using partitions), as well using a star or
snowflake schema to store slow changing fields and attributes within dimensions
and fast-changing fields and transactions in facts.
* **Replication:** The ability to update tables incrementally via upserts,
replicating metadata changes from one database to another, as well the ability
for the server to retry failed attempts due to timeout sessions and temporary
internal server errors.
* **Scripts:** The ability to write several general scripts that can be reused for
all the data operations that you need to run within your project.
* **Knowledge of various Database Types:** To take the most advantage of the
different features each different type of database or instance provides.

Although setting up a local relational database is easy as writing three command
lines in your operating system, other proprietary databases need you to connect
to their API or use their proprietary executable and libraries to take the most
advantage of their features. Open source tools are even harder to set up or to
maintain since not everything is tailored to your needs out of the box. Besides
setting up instances, if you never learned how a data operation works before, it
will get some time before you master on writing the perfect script of doing it
effectively. All data operations you do within your project will always have
some elements that are unique or you have never encountered in the previous
projects you have worked before. Regardless, no matter what project you are
working for, there will always be a way to identify data operations that are
closely similar to other data operations where the only difference is the
parameters you pass. In those cases, writing helper functions or general scripts
where you can pass different types of parameters abstracts away most of the code
that you would have repeated several times within your code. The data
exploration that you have mastered previously will help you a lot in doing the
rest of the upkeep work on setting the right data models and making sure you can
replicate them in other instances even during times where your server has an
outage. Although creating a ship is challenging, keeping the ship out of danger
is also a formidable task. How do you know you don’t hit on an iceberg during
the middle of the night and how do you evaluate the impact of a collision like
that to remedy the effect before the whole ship starts to sink? What do you do
when your ship comes with something unexpected like a big whale swarming by?

### **CHAPTER 3: MONITORING TOOLS**

**Set the flashlights on, the speakers on, a toolbox and a map on-board, and
someone to oversee the surrounding area from the top. It is better to be ready
for any event that will surprise us so we do not miss our spot!**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1000/1*D8g_pwqatTB2uKmdkVaVeA.png)
<br>*Arthur IV is said to be protected by the gods. But if we look under the surface,
the ship is bundled with several monitoring tools. Having all your source code
organized in a version control system, documenting everything from a top-down
and bottom-up view, being pro-active by logging all your activity and debugging
whenever an alert shows up will make your ship bulletproof.*

Arthur ship may not be the hugest one or one that has recently been built, but
boy, has time proven the ship to be a legend? The ship named Arthur comes from
his great-grandfather. It started as a deck of holding up to a dozen people and
now renovated for the fourth time, his ship Arthur the fourth can hold up to
five hundred crew and has held up to this day without a scratch. Some call it a
miracle of God. You ask captain Arthur how was he able to hold his ship up
without a dent to this day and he replies he only speaks to those worthy that
can pass through his trials. You accept the trial and although the next day you
failed to pass the test, your navigation skills and the craftsmanship of your
ship amused him and show his mercy upon to you, “Well, not everyone was perfect
from the start, I like your effort and you my child have shown potential. Very
well, this secret recipe comes from my great-grandfather. Follow them well and
you may become a legend one day. The steps are:”

* **Version Control System:** You have to show your source code to the light of
everyone. In order to do that, you have to store all your source code in a
version control system that is accessible and readable. Where your files and
subsequent changes are organized appropriately. And last but not least, the
ability to search the code with ease in the same way you type something on your
favorite search engine.
* **Documentation:** All source code can be seen more clearly if we are able to
put all our coordinates on a map while keeping notes of all our journey we have
explored so far through a journal. I leave that up to your imagination, as long
it becomes useful to you and the rest of your crew. Drawing diagrams with icons
may sound a thing only user interface designers do these days, but boy does a
documentation fits the bill well for that too. All you have to do is get either
a software that has all things set up for you or get a digital or physical pen
and start drawing rectangles, circles, arrows and pasting open source clip art
images and you have something for others to follow for understanding your data
flow which you can later share them on a blog so you can recruit more people on
your crew that will be fond of your creations. Make sure all your journey is in
a diary with descriptive narratives of what roadblocks you explored (also called
the story part of writing a ticket) and how your genius mind of yours found the
easiest way to overcome the obstacle by using the least resources from you crew
(also called the minimum viable product of writing a ticket). Look how big
companies overcome their challenges these days. Every task that has been agreed
to has been usually written out so no miscommunication, misunderstandings
happen, especially on project assignments that were assigned to an outsource
team. Look also how the two big cloud service providers have extensive general
documentation for the services that provide to their clients so they can save
the cost of hiring consultants on setting up their instances and do it by
themselves IKEA style.
* **Logging & Alerts:** Keep the radio on while you sleep in case you start
hearing a distressing call. Given that our journey is always in the middle of
nowhere, your radio will be playing full of noise and nothing out of the
ordinary. But in few occasions, you may be surprised to hear sirens echoing in.
It is those moments you were waiting for yourself to be a professional hero.
Another day to capture yourself in the middle of the night to save the ship from
a dent that came from a series of unfortunate events. In order to do this
effectively, you have to log all your data operations activity in a logger where
it is easy to search specific activity and the ability to create trigger alerts
with specific keywords found within the log. The more neat, detailed and
informative the log activity, the easier it will be to access the information
and have the ability to identify the root of the issue. Having as well daily
summary health reports of the completion time of data operations that you run,
the number of records each table accounts and the resources all queries consumed
gives you presentable information at your disposal immediately which you can
archive them for historical purposes.
* **Debugging:** Having an alarm in our bed is just only half of the step in
dealing with an unexpected event. It was meant to be part of the main action. Do
not try to go back to bed every time you hear the alarm unless you want one day
to be under the water. Cleaning up the mess and the leaks of the ship are left
for the crew. As a captain, you have to identify and fix the root of the issue
with your handy-dandy toolbox named as mister debugger. Mister debugger is
similar to how a forensic team identifies a crime scene. You get some samples
out of your data and go down deep the rabbit hole until you find something
irregular where you can scientifically replicate your findings.

If you have not noticed, all these steps mentioned above are just basic
housekeeping anybody can do which may feel unimportant because they do not seem
from the surface to add any meaningful value given the amount of time it takes
to keep up your ship polished up to the tiniest detail. Nonetheless, there is a
saying that cleanliness is half of the faith. Our ship would not have been long
spirited to this day if we have not spent half of our time on keeping up with
all the unexpected it could happen to it.

### **CHAPTER 4: PRODUCTIVITY TOOLS**

**Be more productive in your trade by using natural language, interpreted
language within a Linux environment and do more audit instead of full
comprehensive tests.**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*Aec62HdhkT6nwMrKlq6gSA.png)
<br>*Make sure your productivity toolbox is fully stacked. Using interpreted
languages and doing audit tests can take you miles away from the rest.*

#### Interpreted & Natural Languages

Today, SQL and Python are the most popular languages on interacting with your
raw data. One big corporation only needs its entry-level data engineers to know
how to write SQL and Python proficiently. Another big corporation even needs its
data analysts to know extensively to write Python and SQL as well. Will Python
and SQL transform you to be a master of the basics of data wrangling and DIY
data pipelines? The answer is definitely a NO because a language will not teach
you the specific trades of your career, but it will make you more productive
compared to other languages. Let me explain. In compiled languages, you have to
wait for an extra step called compiling before you get a result. In contrast,
just like web designers, an interpreted language gives you the result
immediately after you hit enter, which makes it a great way for debugging small
units out of your full code. The first interpreted language is the one
incorporated in the Linux operating system called as Shell. However, I have
found that several of the intermediate basic programming tasks that you want to
do are counter-intuitive in Shell and it is best to stick on many occasions with
Python in order to have an easier time on maintaining the code for the future.
SQL, on the other hand, gained popularity for its ease of use that even business
users have a good handle on it. This created a network effect — the more users
use this service, the more valuable it becomes. Learning SQL in your data career
is like learning English as your second language so you can work at a popular
tourist destination.

#### Audit Tests

The last thing in improving your work productivity is by auditing a subset of
your data on your test runs instead of the full dataset. Imagine that every time
you find a unique error after your data has been processed for an hour while
another person tests the same dataset, but a subset of it, taking only one
minute instead of an hour. If the total errors where 49, the former person would
have taken a week to solve the problem while a latter one would have finished
fixing all the errors under an hour. The most annoying part of a data engineer
or a data scientist is the waiting part of your test runs and the easiest way to
alleviate this is by using only the minimum data you need to replicate the
problem until it gets completely resolved. Leave the comprehensive test runs as
your last tests and resolve the most of your errors like a graphic designer
would do.

### **CHAPTER 5: AUTOMATION & INNOVATION**

**As a captain, your time is precious. Let the boring stuff be automated or done
by others, but remember that your role there is still to innovate.**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*Jj4wI1QrRYEB6xvhDCHJcg.png)
<br>*Developer tools are great for building stuff that cannot be abstracted away. But
remember, it is foolish on reinventing the wheel. Find ways to automate mundane
work in order to focus more on adding value in new ways within your
organization.*

Although your handy dandy tools do not drag and drop where you can get all your
daily business operations abstracted away, they are developer tools that allow
them to output the most out of all the effort on whatever that cannot be
abstracted away. Whether it is creating machine learning models or embedding
more APIs within your main data pipeline, it offers the most libraries and
support from several companies to do most of the data operations you need to
perform within your organization. There is always a need for all of us as well
to find a place where we work in places where we innovate in order to have the
competitive advantage over others that less innovate. It is okay to let code
that abstracts away stuff that otherwise you will be reinventing the wheel. But
we still have to find our purpose in ways that we differentiate from the rest by
providing solutions where we can deliver more of the demanding needs of our
customers that are still not catered to this day. As a data engineer your duties
are twofold:

* **Automate:** Find solutions that can abstract away work that takes too much of
your work time without doing too many compromises of what has worked well
before. If a third party service that can do that stuff for you is cheap and not
limited to what you currently already do, then it is worth to give it a shot.
Otherwise, automating it with your own custom scripts will still do ways by
saving up your time for focusing on more important tasks within your
organization.
* **Innovate:** Find ways to find more innovative solutions, as in, is there a
better way in how we currently process our data? Is the current algorithm
effective enough on forecasting and recommending the best results? Is the way we
transfer data and query the data comparably fast and cheap enough? Those and
other questions that are not provided out of the box are problems that you have
to start thinking out of the box.

### **CHAPTER 6: COMMUNICATION**

**If the crew does not understand the decisions a captain provides or the crew
influences the captain to the wrong direction or are in disagreement, it becomes
a short-sighted strategy to follow. The best ships have a crew that understand
the different perspectives a captain holds on venturing new terrains as well the
captain understands the strengths and weaknesses of each of his key members in
his tribe and work each to the things that they are great at so together can
bring a synergy to the obstacles that they will have to face ahead.**

Understanding the rest of the crew that consumes the data you prepare is an
important element, especially if the rookies were recently recruited or are
still rookies on the way they handle the data for their business needs.
Preparing the data all pampered up to only the limited data that they are
allowed to explore or specific visual dashboards or drill down text reports that
have a few options to change the logic or filter the results may be okay for
crew that is not interested to dig down deep the rabbit hole of our next
treasure hunt. After all, a lot of the crew have tasks that may not be the most
critical but are supportive enough to keep the essentials of our trip in check.
Faithfully, we should respect that. On the other hand, we still have to wonder
for the rest that wants something more specific to their needs. This is where
you have to coordinate appropriately based on the maturity of the organization
and the depth of expertise the person that you are talking to. To keep the crew
in spirit with your ideas, you should:

* Have some basic reports, dashboards, and other tools for the users that are less
initiated on exploring data within your organization.
* Prepare small white papers and documentation of best practices users should do
when retrieving data with the database so everyone is on the same page.
* Have the proper data literacy training provided to users who want to make
insights through raw data that currently don’t do it effectively or properly.
* Make sure all business requirements are documented like reading a game
walkthrough so you don’t need to discuss with your friends on how to progress
the game for the most of the stuff whenever you get lost. Google, for instance,
provides what each column within their Google analytics sessions represent and
provide informative videos on how everything works under the hood. Instead of
getting stuck on finishing the game in week, months, years, a walkthrough helps
you to master most of what the business represents within a week so you can
start making an impact to your organization from month one.
* Find data solutions that are tailored for users that want to make an analysis on
huge sets amount of data. In most cases, an open source or proprietary columnar
database that gets accessed through a software that streamlines data exploration
will enable your users to get more sophisticated insights than they did before.
* Have all that has been communicated delivered in a written form to avoid
miscommunication and misunderstandings. It is pretty ironic if your organization
does not do that. If an organization tracks user behavior to make insights into
what is happening, why do not do that the same for the internal employees that
are working there? Even in organisations that have shown the highest degree of
trust, sometimes we slip into biases: the people that you outsource will do
shortcuts on the requirements that you provide, people will make wrong
priorities of the tasks they have to do based on with the people who they have
talked the most instead of the people that need the most attention.
* Make sure the business requirements given are concise and specific as possible
and the tasks provided follow the norms of providing ample time for completing
the task without any sign of urgency. Furthermore, contacting your crew every
quarter for long-term strategic goals in the ventures that you all want to
explore is essential so all people are in agreement on differentiating between
the most important and the less important tasks which can be spilled over to the
rest of the quarters. When they come and complain and forget what has been
discussed before, remind them about it and teach them to have the patience on
sticking with it. Make sure on those long-term strategy discussions that you
give enough time to your own personal self on learning new skills of your trade
that may help within your current crew in your future endeavors.
* Learn and appreciate the strengths of each key member within your tribe. After
all, you are riding your ship along with others. A lot of organizations embrace
diversity within the same domain of thought. Think of it like a soccer match.
Not all are attackers, neither all are defenders, even star players on the
midfield may not be proportionally all good on the different type of tasks that
we have just described so far. Acknowledge each members strength and place them
in a field they are most comfortable with to boost the team chemistry. A lot of
successful organizations do that and create a workplace everyone wants to work,
resulting in the lowest attrition possible. For instance, in one of my school
projects, we created a social network with the most basic features in two days
with two students that I never met before. Regardless, we created the best
project in our class because we complemented our own unique skills with each
other (one in the front end, another one on the back end, and another one
writing the documentation). We were all shocked by how we were able to achieve
that within a limited amount of time. Let us not make 1+1=2, but 1+1=3.

Following the above is essential for the organization to have a long-term
relationship between the captain and the crew, between captains and other
captains on a tribe. Otherwise, our blind love, at first sight, will overcloud
us in a short-sighted way the things that should have kept both parties in a
long-term relationship and at the same time content in what they do. Before
these relationships end up fragmented or turn out sour, let us take care of the
relationships with others appropriately before these issues become harder to
discuss down the road.

### **CHAPTER 7: SKILLS**

**Sharpen your skills, do not let your tools of the trade become rusty or else
your rivals will reach to the treasure before you do. Do a lot of side quests
before you dive through a main challenging quest.**

A lot of people enjoy the pleasure of working your nine to five job and flip 180
degrees after they leave their workplace and pretend that what they did in the
office was a different person. Sometimes, people are like a burger patty that
you have to grill at both sides. For most of us, this is entirely okay and
possible, but not for the responsibilities a captain must do. You see, a captain
must not only associate with only the work responsibilities that are laid out
within the written contract, but be up to date with the latest practices and
technological tools so our crafts are up to the same standards with the rest of
the leading companies to this day. A lot of companies offer their employees
certificates and courses which they subsidize the cost for attending them in the
evening hours of the day, flexibility on the working hours and deadlines so they
can learn on the go and even some companies go even further to dedicate a whole
or half day out of every week to let the staff learn something or do a side
project in the workplace. A real captain is not someone that he tries to show
off by following what the rest of the crowd does. We discussed in our previous
section that the crew has to understand the difference of a captain. While the
crew mindset yearn when they will reach their destination to retrieve a jar of
gold, a captain stays overnight and doubts whether his ship will be able to hold
up in the next journeys and if one day his ship gets wrecked either through
unfortunate luck or mismanagement from the rest of the crew, how can others
identify his attributes as still worthy of getting another chance on holding
aboard with the rest of his potential crew on a new ship? Although a data
engineer is not a nightmare as what an entrepreneur has to face, the job
requires a lot of creativity and a set of versatile skills that take up a lot of
time to pick up. Organisations that understand the needs of their staff provide
flexible times so they can brush up their existing skills. In return, they grow
their talents over time and are quite content for ensuring with themselves that
the future of their career is more secure.

A great thing a data engineer should do is to recycle what he learned during his
education, his homework, his workplace, and the freelance work he did and
transform them as useful public side projects. Not only you will have a
portfolio like a graph designer showcases himself to others, you will be
revisiting the previous projects that you did and gain new insights on the tasks
you did before and keep them more optimized and organized so you can reuse them
on your future endeavors. It is also a good way to re-assess yourself to whether
the things you are already working become meaningful to you. Although each of us
has a different personality compared to others, we all share in common on
associating new problems with different problems that we have solved before. It
is like pulling some memory stacks out of our brain and pushing new ones after
we solved an existing problem. Besides having the special opportunity for
mastering the tasks you did not have the time before, you will gain more
visibility to what you already know and be more confident on your existing
skills which you can showcase yourself to others.

### **CHAPTER 8: MOTIVATION**

**The compass is the most important object a captain has in his possession.
Vision first, Mission second.**

What happens when you reach a dead end or have been set up by your rivals or got
completely disillusioned to a destination that actually does not exist leaving
your crew completely in the middle of nowhere? What do you do on those
occasions? Do you wake up in the morning full of content on your current
expedition or have you ever left the compass under the drawer for so long that
it has started to collect dust? An important thing a captain should do is to not
set all your hopes up to something that is too narrow-minded and instead have a
general vision that can have a diversified set of missions, hoping at least one
becomes successful. We want you as a captain to not only be motivated by being
passionate about something, but constantly be passionate for a long time, and
the only way for every morning to be determined, confident and pumped up to the
challenges you are working despite the ongoing distractions you have on your
personal life is by having a general vision in such a way where if everything
fails you have backup plans you can fall to. Although Elon Musk might have put
all eggs into one basket, it does not translate that he has only one mission to
follow through, but one general vision he has set apart for himself. SpaceX is a
different mission from what Tesla does to what The boring company does, but they
all can fit on the same vision of “shedding the light back on bringing
innovation within the physical structure of our world like the times we built
airplanes and nuclear plants”.

In order to find the passion that you will be interested, you have to
self-discover what ticks you up all day. Once you find it out, be expressive
about it and use your thinking caps in what ways you can bring impact to the
domain that you are interested around yourself, your community, and to the whole
society. At first, if you never expressed something that you cared about a lot,
you will not be at your best on discussing this topic professionally. You may
just complain about the problems around it and your conclusion may sound like a
cliffhanger with no resolution. That is okay. But you will realize sooner or
later that the topic you discussed is not convincing and there will be no much
people to care about it given how much friction you have already portrayed about
it. The best example of expressing your motivation is what we know so far about
Steve Jobs for those who worked or reported around him. Almost all attest to the
same accounts: Steve Jobs was so enamored about his vision of bringing digital
devices that customers will love that you didn’t care much whether he
exaggerated about the things he was saying. He was so optimistic about bringing
those solutions to life, it felt like an opportunity that you would never want
to miss under such leadership. Respectively, instead of arguing about the topics
you love as a dead end, think about the ways you can bring solutions to the
table where tomorrow the skies look a little bit more clear than they used to
before.

Having constant passion of something general you are interested at and having a
practical mindset around it will ultimately become a great motivator for what
you are currently doing and where you will be wanting to head into the future.
For me, besides a big bulk of my time is learning to be a good data
practitioner, I spend the rest of my time on the topic of personal development.
You will never understand my reasons because you may lack much about my personal
background, but you can take my commitment for granted as I have dedicated
enough time on reading several self-help books over the last few years that I
later analyze and give very big thorough reviews which you can find them online.
At the same time, these self-help books influenced me a lot in how I think and
work things out that without them I would have had a different mindset. I find
improving our own self is not so widespread within the daily digital fabric of
our life. We all share photos and articles, buy all our stuff online, learn new
languages and skills, but do we take care of our health properly, make smart
investments by getting only the things that we need, and make meaningful
relationships with others? Think about these facts: A lot of the top causes of
deaths can be prevented by tracking our diet and proper exercise, hospital
mistakes being one of the top three causes of deaths can also be mitigated by
empowering the patient to be more pro-active and medical staff to approach
mistakes by not covering them up due to liability costs, but to convert them as
important insights where we can learn from for improving our existing
procedures. A lot of the spending that becomes a waste can be mitigated by
tracking what we use and do not use and take those patterns as a future
indicator for changing our purchasing habits. The way we treat others and others
treat us is important so we all work on careers that we like and companies hire
more people that are passionate of the vision that they hold. If each
conversation between both parties have an input of what they liked and disliked
between each other, then we can align them with better recommendations on what
they can fit themselves for the future. If Steve Jobs was still alive and had a
mid-crisis like Bill Gates did by abandoning his business endeavors on computers
and found out that we need to make all individuals as better models to our
society by pitching a rhetoric out to you with one of the few ideas we discussed
before, would have you been sold to his idea? Have you noticed that all of the
problems provided related to personal development are answered with possible
solutions to the problem instead of complaining about it and treating it as a
dead end? Have you noticed that the answers contain the words tracking,
insights, input, recommend? If so, is it data related? So what can we get from
the example that I am honestly passionate about:

* I definitely did my research. Always learn more about what you are passionate
about and one way to learn about that topic is what others are saying about this
topic through books and articles.
* Make sure you get advise from others on your ideas whenever possible and try to
fit your ideas within our society on something that could possibly work at some
odds, not by complaining without giving any sides for a resolution.
* Have at least three different plans and test them out. Only then you will know
if it was actually what you expected. Our imagination many times deviates from
reality. It could be that you realize that it is not as meaningful as you hoped
for later on or it is currently too far-fetched and will not provide too much
impact at this moment.

A lot of data engineers that I listen to their presentations or have few met so
far feel like the topic of their motivation is how they can expand their
specialization and make it more efficient instead of opening their creative
minds to topics that they are already interested for the fear that they will
limit their scope of the opportunities associated with their skills. Therefore,
don’t expect much people to speak openly about it unless they personally know
you, but it is so essential to appreciate others who are passionate about
something, for which crew will want to go along with a captain that is
passionate about nothing, where in times things become peril, he cannot retain
the composure and stay sober for being a role model example to others? For when
you talk to them about your adventures of finding the golden goose egg to
others, they will just keep the conversation silent, making you wonder whether
they were the ones that kill the goose that laid the golden eggs. But little do
they know that their great-grandmother who they inherited the ship from revolves
around doing something positive for the world, they just either forgot about it
or are too stressful on defending it, but have it not been what all
organizations were founded from? Know well what positive contributions the core
business of your organization covers. It should be your elevator pitch.

### **CONCLUSION**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*TwxOo_xBszfD2ayWzgJlyg.png)
<br>*Remember, think of Data Engineering like a soccer match. Not all are attackers,
neither all are defenders, even star players on the midfield may not be
proportionally all good on the different type of tasks that we have just
described so far.*

If you have reached so far, you did well. Now you are ready to master all the
basics of a data engineer. Getting the proper education at school and while at
work, doing proper data exploration, being good at your craft on creating
sophisticated data pipelines and being able to maintain them with the
appropriate monitoring tools, learning to use languages, environments and
processes in order to be more productive, as well automating and improving
existing projects within your organisation. And last but not least, coordinating
with the stakeholders that you work with is done effectively and the data given
to them is consumed efficiently. A rule of thumb is that not all organizations
need you to know all the aspects that we have discussed before. As a starter of
your data career, this list is exhausting and overwhelming. You should start
learning one topic at a time until you feel you have covered most of the areas
we have just discussed. We mention other important topics that are more general,
but still feel to be very important to take into account within your data
career. First, a data career like many other IT professions requires constant
learning in order to stay current within your role. We tell you how you can do
that in the most effective way so you can retain your confidence. Second, having
a positive attitude is essential and there is no way around faking it so we
dedicate a section to help you out on finding something that you will be
passionate about that is related to your data career.

It seems you are all set. Start small and over time if you take all the lessons
that we have taken account so far your ship will eventually grow and explore in
new realms that we have not yet explored before. It is a great adventure out
there. All you have to do is start taking control of those wheels, get the hang
out of it, and with experience, you will go to farther destinations with various
weather conditions that you are currently were never waiting for. Best wishes
and hope we meet one day.

Sincerely,<br> Fearless dweller of the seven seas
