I watched the movie **17 again**. The movie is filled with comedy and metaphysical twists. But behind all the paths the movie tries to be entertaining on the surface, it resonates not only important family values but ways of self-actualizing them instead of being self-delusional. The plot of the movie starts with our main protagonist having a high chance of landing a full scholarship at a prestigious university by performing well in the last basketball match through his high school tenure. Just minutes before the match was about to begin, his girlfriend, full of distress, interrupted him to break up the bad news: she was already pregnant. Instead of your self average-joe that focused on prioritizing their self-interest first by delaying the concern of his girlfriend's pregnancy for another day, the protagonist of the movie chose to stand by her at the sacrifice of not participating at the basketball match, losing his only opportunity on landing that scholarship. Although this may sound exaggerated, it is partly true that juggling between the roles of an athlete and a parent is not an easy task. Much evidence shows that the pressure of high expectations throughout a sports career demands the negligence of any other roles a down to earth individual tries to meet on a daily basis. This applies as well to any other jobs that demand working overtime at the sacrifice of a work-life balance. People assume that as long they leave a legacy by specializing on a specific skillset throughout a job that they can delude themselves that they represent a great human model to society, neglecting the fact they could have been better off if they approached life from a broader perspective. Quoting from the book `Natural Cognitive Theology` By **Lorin Friesen**:

> Steven Ortiz, a professor of sociology at Oregon State University, describes the juxtaposition between job and family that often occurs in the marriage of the professional athlete. Cognitively speaking, mental networks involving spouse, family, and personal identity are more fundamental than mental networks involving hitting, throwing, and kicking round objects within some playing field. However, wives see their role in this kind of marriage as a supportive role. They would feel guilty if they were to question it. In career-dominated marriages, it’s the husband’s career that comes first. There is an implicit unspoken agreement that the wife will focus on the family and childrearing, and make it possible for him to focus on his career almost exclusively. These characteristics exist in other career-dominated marriages with politicians, corporate executives, military servicemen, physicians, and so on...Stated crudely, athletes are being driven by childish MMNs of sexual gratification, and it is common for athletes to bed other women when they are traveling. When playing a game, the professional athlete is an expert at going beyond mere impulse in order to function within a grid of knowledge, skill, and understanding. However, knowledge and understanding are lacking and impulse rules in the far more emotional realm of sexuality. The wife exhibits a similar cognitive error by protecting the professionalism of the game while ignoring her husband’s peccadilloes. The underlying problem is that the athlete grew up in an environment that focused upon job excellence while ignoring personal excellence. Ortiz explains that Spoiled-athlete syndrome begins early in sports socialization. From the time they could be picked out of a lineup because of their exceptional athletic ability, they’ve been pampered and catered to by coaches, classmates, teammates, family members and partners. As they get older, this becomes a pattern. Because they’re spoiled, they feel they aren’t accountable for their behavior off the field. They’re so used to people looking the other way. 

If my opinion may sound an overgeneralization, you cannot ignore the events that happen in the movie afterward. We later see the protagonist in the movie at an old age that is going throughout a divorce while having one son and one daughter and being fired from a company that he worked for 16 years. Little does he know that his daughter is engaged in a relationship with the captain of the basketball team. The relationship of the captain of the basketball team under his daughter showed the characteristics of being under the influence of the emotional realm of sexuality. When the captain of the basketball team underperformed in one his games, he showed lacking characteristics of knowledge and understanding over his girlfriend, dumping her when he had to make a choice between the two. 

Besides the innocence of her daughter on ending in a wrong relationship, it begs to ask the question why the wife chose a divorce with his husband and why that choice was done at a very late stage during their lifetimes. Let us answer first why her wife chose to divorce him at a very late stage of their lifetimes first. The first reason her wife divorced him late was that she was pregnant and thereafter had to take care of the children. Neurologically speaking, the process of pregnancy has minor brain changes (that get back to default after a period of time) that promotes the safety of their offspring. In the book the `Female Brain` by **Louann Brizendine**, I quote:

> Ellie, a thirty-nine-year-old first-time mother, had been happily married for two years to a self-employed salesman when she came to see me. During the first year of their marriage, she had lost a baby to miscarriage. Within six months she was pregnant again. Soon after her daughter’s birth, she began having “freak-outs,” as she called them, about her husband’s earning power and lack of health care benefits. In truth, their financial situation hadn’t changed at all, and she’d never had any of these misgivings before. Now, however, she was blazingly angry with her husband for not providing a more secure home for her and their baby girl. Her needs and reality had changed radically, virtually overnight, and her new, protective maternal brain was tightly focused on her husband’s ability to provide for the family. With their aggressive, protective instinct fully primed, mothers become hypervigilant about all aspects of their home turf, especially infant safety, such as having babyproof electrical plug covers, installing latches on the kitchen cabinet doors, and making sure everyone washes their hands thoroughly before touching the baby. Like a human global positioning system, a mother’s brain centers for sight, sound, and movement are honed in on monitoring and tracking her baby. This increased vigilance can take all forms, depending on the threat a mother sees to the safety and stability of her “nest.” Even reassessment of her husband’s role as provider is not unusual.

This high priority of a wife's safety over her surroundings may be the main reason why she could exhibit a cognitive error by neglecting her husband’s flaws. As long there is money floating to the table, a wife can neglect the other attributes of what a relationship originally constitutes. That may be one of the main reasons why the protagonist of the movie worked for the same company for 16 years. However, as children grow older, the wife becomes more independent and the neurochemicals within her brain influence her to be less submissive to others. Quoting from the book `Female Brain` by **Louann Brizendine**

> Sylvia still felt hopeful that she would find the “perfect man” to grow old with, an equal partner, a soul mate, someone she could talk to and share life’s joys with, but not do the physical caretaking, shopping, cooking, laundry, and cleaning that many of the men she was dating had come to expect of their ex-wives. As she put it, she had no intention of being a nurse, and she didn’t want someone to steal her purse. “Otherwise,” she said, “I’d rather have no one right now.” After all, she had lots of dear friends who made her happy. She was looking forward to a much less psychologically stressful existence than what she had been experiencing lately in arguing with Robert. Hormones in the brain are part of what makes us women. They are the fuels that activate our sex-specific brain circuits, resulting in female-typical behavior and skills. What happens to our female brains at menopause, when we lose this hormonal fuel? The brain cells, circuits, and neurochemicals that have relied on estrogen soon shrivel... While every woman’s body and brain react differently in the years after menopause, for many this is a time of increased freedom and control over our lives. Impulses are less likely to confuse or agitate us. Our survival may no longer depend on a steady paycheck, and there’s less value in pretending about how we feel and more in presenting and living our passionate, real selves. 

Similarly, we see the wife of the main protagonist is taking initiatives after her divorce, such as remodeling the garden area of their family house. But out of all that, doesn't that all sound unexpected when her husband chose to take care of her wife by working on a stable work-life balance job in order to be able to look after their kids. The problem is not whether the husband was sincere to his commitments, but whether he was a hypocrite deep inside when he was forced around those situations. As we see during the course of the movie, we see the wife discussing that he was kind of tired of his husband defending and blaming about the things not going through as he anticipated as much as smooth as his basketball performance at his high school times. It is definitely pleasing for a girl to listen to honesty and sincerity from a partner as that gives hope for positive outcomes for the future. However, beyond their high tolerance of their partner's failure, there is always a time bomb going back to their brain, that once it becomes switched, they will say "enough is enough". In summary, being committed to your partner is not enough. It also needs delivering the message across consistently with high standards. This is the characteristic of taking ownership among the choices we decided to be accountable. In the article, `Ownership - A Defining Trait Of A Leader` by **Tomasz Tunguz** who co-authored the book `Winning With Data` discusses the book `Extreme Ownership` and states: 

> Unlike many others, it stands out because in the first chapter is an admission of failure... By owning the mistake, Willink and Kahneman expose their humanity and in so doing, build more trust with honesty. 

Similarly, during the trial of the divorce, the protagonist writes a letter to his wife for others to read during the court stating: 

> Scarlet , before you go through with this I wanna remind you of September 7th , 1988. It was the first time that I saw you , you were reading Less Than Zero. You were wearing a Guns N' Roses T-shirt. I'd never seen anything so perfect. I remember thinking that I had to have you, or I'd die. Then you whispered you loved me at the homecoming dance. And I felt so peaceful, and safe, because I knew that no matter what happened from that day on, nothing could ever be that bad, because I had you. And then I grew up, and I lost my way. And I blamed you for my failures. And I know that you think you have to do this today. But I don't want you to. But I guess, if I love you... I should let you move on."

There is a lot of comedy and metaphysical twists that will be very obvious once you see the trailer of the movie. But beyond the cover of the book, there are a lot of moral lessons that can be learned throughout this movie. 

By the way, the books the `Female Brain` by **Louann Brizendine** & `Natural Cognitive Theology` By **Lorin Friesen** are discussed in my personal development portfolio [Improving Your Personal Mental Map](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/tree/master/selfdevboostermentalmaptour) at Week 5 and Week 11 respectively. Furthermore, **Tomasz Tunguz** behind the article `Ownership - A Defining Trait Of A Leader` has written a great book that I already reviewed titled [Winning With Data](https://github.com/softdevlife/contributed_articles/blob/master/book_reviews/winning_with_data.md).
